facebook
linkedin
youtube
rss
x
NEWSLETTER
EN
LATEST NEWS
RESOURCES
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
VIDEO
BIG DATA & ANALYTICS
CLOUD
MORE
BLOGS
EVENTS
HOME
LATEST NEWS
SHARE
Add eWeek as a preferred source
READ IN:
Deutsch
,
Français
Sora 2 Can Generate SpongeBob, Pikachu, and Other Copyrighted Characters
WRITTEN BY
FIONA JACKSON
PUBLISHED: OCT 2, 2025
UPDATED: OCT 3, 2025
·
4 minute read
LISTEN
TO THIS ARTICLE
OpenAI’s Sora app makes AI-powered video creation simple. Image Source: App Store
eWeek content and product recommendations are editorially independent. We may make money when you click on links to our partners. Learn More
Sora 2 is being used to generate videos featuring SpongeBob SquarePants, Pikachu, and other copyrighted characters. This comes after OpenAI reportedly allowed studios and talent agencies to opt out of having their work recreated by its latest artificial intelligence generator.
Since the new model was released on Tuesday, Sora 2 users have been enjoying experimenting with their favourite animated characters and testing the system’s boundaries. While OpenAI is rolling out access gradually, it is already possible to find videos of Patrick Star rapping, Nintendo’s Mario escaping from his game, and a boxing match between Pikachu and Blue from Blue’s Clues circulating on X.
Sometimes, copyrighted material appears to inspire clips even if it is not explicitly in the prompt. One user produced a convincing Rocket Raccoon imitation when they asked for a “photorealistic raccoon.”
Another generated an anime version of The NeverEnding Story after requesting a “cute young woman riding a dragon in a flower world, Studio Ghibli style.” It’s interesting that Studio Ghibli-fication is still allowed, given the backlash earlier this year when users of the image generator built into GPT-4o started creating cartoons in the iconic style.
Opt-out requests and Disney’s block
Just before the model and its accompanying Sora app were launched, reports indicated that OpenAI was contacting copyright holders to give them the option to exclude their IP from Sora 2. But OpenAI’s process for honouring any requests more likely involved blocking specific outputs through modifications to the master prompt rather than ensuring the material was excluded from the initial training data.
Why can we assume this? OpenAI only started asking studios if they wanted to opt out in the last week, according to The Wall Street Journal, and it is unlikely that Sora 2 was completely retrained in the short period leading up to its release.
Furthermore, The Washington Post found that the previous iteration of Sora, released long before the opt-out requests, was trained on swathes of copyrighted material. The likes of Netflix and Twitch confirmed that they had not provided their source material for training, and experts said the model was most likely sourced from YouTube and other publicly available online sources.
However, OpenAI appears to be honouring the opt-out requests it received. Disney was among them, according to Reuters, and users have reported being unable to generate Sora 2 videos featuring Spider-Man and Darth Vader.
When asked about how Sora 2 is generating clips containing copyrighted characters, OpenAI told Gizmodo that it sees them as new opportunities for creators to deepen their connection with the fans. It also claimed it was “working with rightsholders to understand their preferences for how their content appears across our ecosystem, including Sora.”
ADVERTISEMENT
Dr Alina Trapova, a copyright law expert at University College London, said that OpenAI may argue that any use of copyrighted material for training is “fair use” in a US court of law, but ultimately still be “tremendously damaging” for rightsholders. She told TechRepublic: “The ‘bad’ potential uses – such as generating racist, misogynist, and harmful content – will bring about a lot of implications for reputation and attribution for these rightsholders. Nickelodeon would certainly not want a racist SpongeBob.”
Trapova added that OpenAI’s opt-out mechanism places a “potentially disproportionate” burden on rightsholders. “They would need to opt out and they would need to provide lots of detail as to what kind of versions of their works they are not happy with,” she told TechRepublic.
“What is more worrying is the fact that such opt-out impetus in the US comes from the AI companies, so they seem to be writing the playbook.”
OpenAI is more strict on human likenesses than copyright, but is it strict enough?
While many copyrighted characters remain accessible in Sora 2, the company states outright that the model will not generate images of recognizable public figures without their consent.
The challenge lies in enforcing this while also maintaining its “cameo” feature, which allows users to insert a realistic avatar of themselves, or any human, animal, or object, in a generated clip.
Through the new Sora app, which is primarily designed for social networking, friends can remix and edit each other’s cameos. Users will control who has access to their cameo and can revoke permissions at any time, as well as review and remove any videos featuring it.
While OpenAI has emphasized safeguards against nonconsensual use of a person’s likeness, it is too early to determine whether these safeguards will actually prevent bullying, harassment, disinformation, and other abuses as the model becomes more powerful and avatars increasingly realistic.
Altman memes highlight limits safeguards
Sam Altman, OpenAI’s CEO, is ironically already demonstrating the limits of these protections. He allowed his likeness to be used in Sora 2, and users have created videos of him getting caught shoplifting GPUs on CCTV and stealing art from the Studio Ghibli HQ.
After all, it is very easy to copy a video, which can persist even if the original is deleted. Even though AI-generated videos carry a Sora 2 watermark and an embedded AI disclaimer in the metadata, it remains to be seen whether people will actually check these markers before sharing politically misleading or even explicit deepfakes.
Read eWeek’s coverage about actress Scarlett Johansson calling out the use of her likeness in a deepfake video. And, how the judges of the 2026 Academy Awards will not take into account whether generative AI tools were used in the making of a movie.
FIONA JACKSON
Fiona Jackson is a news writer who started her journalism career at SWNS press agency, later working at MailOnline, an advertising agency, and TechnologyAdvice. Her work spans human interest and consumer tech reporting, appearing in prominent media outlets such as TechHQ, The Independent, Daily Mail, and The Sun.
STAY AHEAD OF THE TECH MOVES THAT MATTER, FROM TODAY'S GAME-CHANGERS TO TOMORROW'S BREAKTHROUGHS.
Get a free daily email with the tech trends and insights tech leaders need.
ENTER YOUR EMAIL
Join For Free
By subscribing, you agree to receive emails from eWeek. You can unsubscribe at any time. View our Terms and Privacy Policy.
MORE FROM FIONA JACKSON
Apple Intelligence Cheat Sheet: A Complete Guide in 2026
Law Schools Want Applicants Fluent in AI, Not Afraid of It
Gemini 2.5 Flash: Google’s AI Image Editor Is Now Available In Full
OpenAI Is Going To Let Copyright Holders Opt Out of Sora 2
RECOMMENDED FOR YOU...
LATEST NEWS
OpenAI Is Going To Let Copyright Holders Opt Out of Sora 2
OpenAI’s new video generator has been used to create videos featuring popular characters like SpongeBob.
FIONA JACKSON
OCT 6, 2025
LATEST NEWS
OpenAI’s Sora 2 Will Not Recreate Your Copyrighted Character – If You Opt Out
Creators will need to opt out of having their copyrighted character or other work recreated by OpenAI’s Sora 2, which launched today. If they don’t, the new text-to-video generator may create clips featuring that IP. OpenAI is notifying talent agencies and studios about the updated Sora and the opt-out process, sources told The Wall Street […]
FIONA JACKSON
SEP 30, 2025
LATEST NEWS
Meta’s Muse Image Faces Backlash Over Instagram Consent
Meta’s Muse Image faces backlash over using public Instagram photos by default, as privacy groups call for opt-in consent and stronger user controls.
LIZ TICONG
JUL 10, 2026
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
OpenAI Sora: Revolutionary Text-to-Video Tool
Curious about OpenAI Sora? Discover the future of text-to-video in our latest overview.
COLLINS AYUYA
APR 29, 2024
eWeek has the latest technology news and analysis, buying guides, and product reviews for IT professionals and technology buyers. The site's focus is on innovative solutions and covering in-depth technical content. eWeek stays on the cutting edge of technology news and IT trends through interviews and expert analysis. Gain insight from top innovators and thought leaders in the fields of IT, business, enterprise software, startups, and more.
facebook
linkedin
youtube
rss
x
COMPANY
About us
Contact us
Advertise with us
Editorial Policy
CATEGORIES
Latest News
Resources
Artificial Intelligence
Video
Big Data & Analytics
Cloud
Networking
Property of TechnologyAdvice. © 2026 TechnologyAdvice. All Rights Reserved
Advertiser Disclosure: Some of the products that appear on this site are from companies from which TechnologyAdvice receives compensation. This compensation may impact how and where products appear on this site including, for example, the order in which they appear. TechnologyAdvice does not include all companies or all types of products available in the marketplace.
TERMS OF SERVICE
PRIVACY POLICY
CALIFORNIA - DO NOT SELL MY INFORMATION
We use cookies and other data collection technologies to provide the best experience for our customers. You may request that your data not be shared with third parties here: Do Not Sell My Data.