Post
Log in Sign up
Post
Log in Sign up
Sam Altman on X: "in regards to recent stuff about how openai handles equity:
we have never clawed back anyone's vested equity, nor will we do that if people do not sign a separation agreement (or don't agree to a non-disparagement agreement). vested equity is vested equity, full stop.
there was a provision about potential equity cancellation in our previous exit docs; although we never clawed anything back, it should never have been something we had in any documents or communication. this is on me and one of the few times i've been genuinely embarrassed running openai; i did not know this was happening and i should have.
the team was already in the process of fixing the standard exit paperwork over the past month or so. if any former employee who signed one of those old agreements is worried about it, they can contact me and we'll fix that too. very sorry about this."
Sam Altman
@sama
in regards to recent stuff about how openai handles equity:
we have never clawed back anyone's vested equity, nor will we do that if people do not sign a separation agreement (or don't agree to a non-disparagement agreement). vested equity is vested equity, full stop.
there was a provision about potential equity cancellation in our previous exit docs; although we never clawed anything back, it should never have been something we had in any documents or communication. this is on me and one of the few times i've been genuinely embarrassed running openai; i did not know this was happening and i should have.
the team was already in the process of fixing the standard exit paperwork over the past month or so. if any former employee who signed one of those old agreements is worried about it, they can contact me and we'll fix that too. very sorry about this.
Readers added context they thought people might want to know Readers added context
According to leaked messages and documents obtained by Vox, senior leadership at OpenAi, including Altman, were very much aware of these equity clawback provisions and signed off on them.
vox.com/future-perfect…
Context is written by people who use X, and appears when rated helpful by others. Find out more .
9:00 PM · May 18, 2024 · 4M
Views
1.1K 1 . 1 K
516 5 1 6
8K 8 K
1.9K 1 . 9 K