Anthropic Launches Claude Fable 5.1 With Lower Costs and Fewer False Positives
Tuesday September 1, 2026 12:15 pm PDT by Juli Clover
Anthropic today introduced Claude Fable 5.1 and Claude Mythos 5.1, which the company says are the "world's most advanced models for coding and knowledge work."
According to Anthropic, Claude Fable 5.1 sets a new standard for coding, knowledge work, and long-running problem-solving tasks. It achieves similar or better results than Fable 5 at low or medium effort, and has much higher performance at higher effort tiers. It outperforms Fable 5, Opus 5, and OpenAI's GPT–5.6 Sol across multiple benchmarks.
Fable 5.1 and Mythos 5.1 are the same model, but with different safeguard levels. Fable 5.1 is available to everyone, but Mythos 5.1 is limited to U.S. companies and individuals participating in Anthropic's trusted access programs. There's a new Life Sciences Verification Program that allows Mythos 5.1's advanced biology capabilities to be used for scientific research, with open enrollment for scientists coming soon.
Safeguards for Fable 5.1 have been improved, and Claude Code users should see around 60 percent fewer cybersecurity false positives. Anthropic says Fable 5.1 can now be used to discover software vulnerabilities, but not develop exploits for them. Fable 5.1 includes invisible watermarking for text generated by Claude, and Anthropic is rolling out a detection API in a private preview. The API is available to eligible organizations as required by EU law.
Fable 5.1 costs approximately 25 percent less than Fable 5 for typical workloads, and up to 45 percent for highly agentic work, because of a reduction in cache-read pricing. Base pricing remains the same. It is available today on all platforms.
Tag: Anthropic
[ 30 comments ]
Get weekly top MacRumors stories in your inbox.
Leave this field empty
Popular Stories
Anthropic's Claude Comes to CarPlay
Friday September 4, 2026 1:43 pm PDT by Juli Clover
Anthropic added CarPlay integration to the Claude iOS app, which means Claude users can talk to Claude through their in-car infotainment systems.Apple added support for third-party chatbots in CarPlay in iOS 26.4. Chatbot apps with CarPlay integration need to add support for a voice control screen, use Apple's designated CarPlay template, and get an entitlement from Apple. Claude can answer ...
Read Full Article &bull; 30 comments
Anthropic Launches Claude Opus 5.5 With Fable-Level Performance at a Lower Price
Tuesday September 22, 2026 12:23 pm PDT by Juli Clover
Anthropic today launched Claude Opus 5.5, which it says is the first model in a new 5.5 model family. Opus 5.5 performs at the level of Claude Fable 5.1 on most work, but costs 40 percent less to run than Opus 5.According to Anthropic, Opus 5.5 is a "major step up" from Opus 5 with improvements in performance and safety. Opus 5.5 is comparable to Mythos 5.1 in biology and cybersecurity, so...
Read Full Article &bull; 38 comments
Apple Smart Home Hub to Feature iMac G4-Style Design
Wednesday September 30, 2026 4:36 am PDT by Hartley Charlton
Apple's long-rumored smart home hub will have an iMac G4-style design and a host of unique features, Bloomberg's Mark Gurman reports. The smart home hub is said to feature a square 6-inch display, with variants that can be placed on a countertop or mounted on a wall. It features a single FaceTime camera on the front, with microphones and speakers in its connected base. Gurman described the...
Read Full Article &bull; 213 comments
Top Rated Comments
J
jack5789
4 weeks ago
I just use the open source Chinese models so that I don't need to deal with Anthropic's nonsense.
Score: 9 Votes ( Like | Disagree )
K
kevcube
4 weeks ago
Available to everyone? You need pro no?
available to everyone with money
Score: 8 Votes ( Like | Disagree )
A
Anglagard
4 weeks ago
The watermark is a hard pass for me.
Score: 8 Votes ( Like | Disagree )
JoeG4
4 weeks ago
LLMs are creepy AF. Generative AI prompting is creepy AF too.
Noise reduction AI is cool. Pattern finding AI is cool. Using AI for things like folding protein and analyzing tons of data? Great!
Using LLMs to confidently blow smoke up my ass instead of searching the web? Eh no thanks.e
I do get a little chuckle out of a forum for products mostly "sold for creatives" getting excited over AI slop production tools.
Score: 6 Votes ( Like | Disagree )
J
jole
4 weeks ago
Watermark is like Cloude Code would be insisting on signing all the commit messages as "Co-Authored-By: Claude", except that you cannot turn it off.
Wait, they did exactly that.
Score: 6 Votes ( Like | Disagree )
M
MacMan988
4 weeks ago
That's the one too dangerous for the world that tried to escape, right?
They all did. It is actually the classic marketing method used by AI companies. First week they say "we've built a new model, we are so worried that it could destroy the world" and then they release it.
If I remember correctly, OpenAI was the first to pull it off with GPT 4 and people were genuinely concerned back then.
Score: 5 Votes ( Like | Disagree )
Read All Comments