SKIP NAVIGATION
MARKETS
BUSINESS
INVESTING
TECH
POLITICS & POLICY
VIDEO
INVESTING CLUB
PRO
LIVESTREAM
Search quotes, news & videos
WATCHLIST
SIGN IN
CREATE FREE ACCOUNT
TECH
OpenAI sends internal memo releasing former employees from controversial exit agreements
PUBLISHED THU, MAY 23 202411:05 PM EDT
Hayden Field
@HAYDENFIELD
SHARE
Share Article via Facebook
Share Article via Twitter
Share Article via LinkedIn
Share Article via Email
KEY POINTS
OpenAI on Thursday backtracked on a controversial decision to, in effect, make former employees choose between signing a non-disparagement agreement that would never expire, or keeping their vested equity in the company.
The internal memo, which was viewed by CNBC, was sent to former employees and also shared with current ones.
“Regardless of whether you executed the Agreement, we write to notify you that OpenAI has not canceled, and will not cancel, any Vested Units,” OpenAI wrote in the internal memo.
“We’re incredibly sorry that we’re only changing this language now; it doesn’t reflect our values or the company we want to be,” an OpenAI spokesperson told CNBC.
In this article
MSFT
-0.03 (-0.01%)
Follow your favorite stocks
CREATE FREE ACCOUNT
Visitor look at their phone next to an Open AI’s logo during the Mobile World Congress (MWC), the telecom industry’s biggest annual gathering, in Barcelona on February 26, 2024.
Jason Redmond | AFP | Getty Images
OpenAI on Thursday backtracked on a controversial decision to, in effect, make former employees choose between signing a non-disparagement agreement that would never expire, or keeping their vested equity in the company.
The internal memo, which was viewed by CNBC, was sent to former employees and shared with current ones.
The memo, addressed to each former employee, said that at the time of the person’s departure from OpenAI, “you may have been informed that you were required to execute a general release agreement that included a non-disparagement provision in order to retain the Vested Units [of equity].”
“Regardless of whether you executed the Agreement, we write to notify you that OpenAI has not canceled, and will not cancel, any Vested Units,” stated the memo, which was viewed by CNBC.
The memo said OpenAI will also not enforce any other non-disparagement or non-solicitation contract items that the employee may have signed.
“As we shared with employees, we are making important updates to our departure process,” an OpenAI spokesperson told CNBC in a statement.
“We have not and never will take away vested equity, even when people didn’t sign the departure documents. We’ll remove nondisparagement clauses from our standard departure paperwork, and we’ll release former employees from existing nondisparagement obligations unless the nondisparagement provision was mutual,” said the statement, adding that former employees would be informed of this as well.
“We’re incredibly sorry that we’re only changing this language now; it doesn’t reflect our values or the company we want to be,” the OpenAI spokesperson added.
Bloomberg first reported on the release from the non-disparagement provision. Vox first reported on the existence of the NDA provision.
The news comes amid mounting controversy for OpenAI over the past week or so.
On Monday — one week after OpenAI debuted a range of audio voices for ChatGPT — the company announced it would pull one of the viral chatbot’s voices named “Sky.”
WATCH NOW
VIDEO01:25
OpenAI’s chatbot voice in focus
“Sky” created controversy for resembling the voice of actress Scarlett Johansson in “Her,” a movie about artificial intelligence. The Hollywood star has alleged that OpenAI ripped off her voice even though she declined to let them use it.
“We’ve heard questions about how we chose the voices in ChatGPT, especially Sky,” the Microsoft
-backed company posted on X. “We are working to pause the use of Sky while we address them.”
Also last week, OpenAI disbanded its team focused on the long-term risks of artificial intelligence just one year after the company announced the group, a person familiar with the situation confirmed to CNBC on Friday.
The person, who spoke to CNBC on condition of anonymity, said some of the team members are being reassigned to multiple other teams within the company.
The news came days after both team leaders, OpenAI co-founder Ilya Sutskever and Jan Leike, announced their departures. Leike on Friday wrote that OpenAI’s “safety culture and processes have taken a backseat to shiny products.”
OpenAI’s Superalignment team, which was formed last year, has focused on “scientific and technical breakthroughs to steer and control AI systems much smarter than us.” At the time, OpenAI said it would commit 20% of its computing power to the initiative over four years.
The company did not provide a comment on the record and instead directed CNBC to co-founder and CEO Sam Altman’s recent post on X, where he shared that he was sad to see Leike leave and that the company had more work to do.
On Saturday, OpenAI co-founder Greg Brockman posted a statement attributed to both himself and Altman on X, asserting that the company has “raised awareness of the risks and opportunities of AGI [artificial general intelligence] so that the world can better prepare for it.”
Choose CNBC as your preferred source on Google and never miss a moment from the most trusted name in business news.
WATCH LIVESTREAM
Prefer to Listen?
NOW
Fast Money
UP NEXT
Mad Money
TRENDING NOW
Trump says he and tech leaders signed AI agreement that is ‘morally binding’
Trump Accounts will auto-enroll children, potentially adding 60 million accounts: Treasury
Trump tries to rename AI ‘super intelligence’ as polls show him sinking on key issue
Education Department extends deadline for student loan interest rate discount
The Fed’s main inflation measure will be released Wednesday. Here’s what to expect
Subscribe to CNBC PRO
Subscribe to Investing Club
Licensing & Reprints
CNBC Councils
Select Personal Finance
Join the CNBC Panel
Closed Captioning
Digital Products
News Releases
Internships
Corrections
About CNBC
Site Map
Podcasts
Careers
Help
Contact
News Tips
Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.
GET IN TOUCH
CNBC Newsletters
Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inbox
SIGN UP NOW
Get this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services.
Advertise With Us
PLEASE CONTACT US
Ad Choices
Privacy Policy
Your Privacy Choices
CA Notice
Terms of Service
© 2026 Versant Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Versant Media Company.
Data is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.
Market Data Terms of Use and Disclaimers
Data also provided by
This site is now part of Versant. By continuing, you agree to our Terms. You also acknowledge that our updated Privacy Policy applies, including your existing data. For info on your data rights, click “Your Privacy Choices” or see “Your Rights” in our Privacy Policy.
We and our partners also use tools on this site to provide the services, personalize your experience, and for analytics, marketing, and advertising. If you previously opted out of selling, sharing, or targeted advertising on this site, you will need to update your Privacy Choice.
Your Privacy Choices Continue