OpenAI’s Internal AI Details Stolen in 2023 Breach, NYT Reports
July 5, 2024
Email This
Subscribe to Newsletter
• Article
A hacker gained access to the internal messaging systems at OpenAI last year and stole details about the design of the company’s artificial intelligence technologies, the New York Times reported on Thursday.
The hacker lifted details from discussions in an online forum where employees talked about OpenAI’s latest technologies, the report said, citing two people familiar with the incident.
However, they did not get into the systems where OpenAI, the firm behind chatbot sensation ChatGPT, houses and builds its AI, the report added.
Microsoft Corp-backed OpenAI did not immediately respond to a Reuters request for comment.
OpenAI executives informed both employees at an all-hands meeting in April last year and the company’s board about the breach, according to the report, but executives decided not to share the news publicly as no information about customers or partners had been stolen.
OpenAI executives did not consider the incident a national security threat, believing the hacker was a private individual with no known ties to a foreign government, the report said. The San Francisco-based company did not inform the federal law enforcement agencies about the breach, it added.
OpenAI in May said it had disrupted five covert influence operations that sought to use its AI models for “deceptive activity” across the internet, the latest to stir safety concerns about the potential misuse of the technology.
The Biden administration was poised to open up a new front in its effort to safeguard the U.S. AI technology from China and Russia with preliminary plans to place guardrails around the most advanced AI Models including ChatGPT, Reuters earlier reported, citing sources.
In May, 16 companies developing AI pledged at a global meeting to develop the technology safely at a time when regulators are scrambling to keep up with rapid innovation and emerging risks.
Copyright 2026 Reuters. Click for restrictions .
Topics
InsurTech
Artificial Intelligence
Fraud
Was this article valuable?
Yes
No
Thank you! Please tell us what we can do to improve this article.
Submit
No Thanks
Thank you! % of people found this article valuable. Please tell us what you liked about it.
Submit
No Thanks
Here are more articles you may enjoy.
Independent Agencies Total About 37,000 in 2026, a Decrease From 2024
Florida OIR Approves Four More HO Rate Cuts as Citizens Keeps Shrinking
Another Crane, Then Another, Collapses Onto Home in Fort Lauderdale
Online Insurance Marketplace Insurify Blocks Meta’s Personal AI Agent Muse
Interested in Ai ?
Get automatic alerts for this topic.
Submit
Email This
Subscribe to Newsletter
• Categories: National News Topics: artificial intelligence (AI) , cyber , data breach , OpenAI
•
Have a hot lead? Email us at newsdesk@insurancejournal.com
More News
Vessel Carrying Vehicles Became Stuck on Rhine River as Levels Drop
Nuclear Plant Settles Cancer, Contamination Lawsuits
World Insurance Associates Acquires Arctic Risk Specialists
New Jersey Employers Should Prepare Now for Oct. 1 Independent Contractor Rule
More News Features
Read This Next
•
OpenAI's Internal AI Details Stolen in 2023 Breach, NYT Reports
•
Catastrophe-Bondholders Bet Hurricane Polo Won't Trigger Losses
•
Full Senate Passes Measure to Reauthorize Federal Terrorism Insurance Backstop
•
Here Are Some AI Doomsday Scenarios Researchers Say Could Put Humanity at Risk
•
FBI Confirms Data Was Breached in Cyber Attack on Springfield Schools