Get more from Live Science
EXPLORE
Choose your Live Science experience
LIVE SCIENCE PLUS
Get started to get free access to selected news stories, receive our daily newsletter, post comments, play games and earn badges.
JOIN FREE
LIVE SCIENCE PRO
Unlimited access to our exclusive features, expert analysis and in-depth interviews, all ad-free
No ads, ever
Exclusive, original reporting
Scientist interviews and video
Member-only features
JOIN LIVE SCIENCE PRO
Sign in
Animals
Archaeology
Health
Science
Planet Earth
Space
Technology
Explore
Sign up for our newsletters
RSS
TRENDING
Exercise and immunity
Kelvin wave
Saturn stargazing
Ancient hydrogen
Taurids meteor shower
Physics & Mathematics Mathematics
'Predatory behavior': Elite mathematicians clash over OpenAI's 'solution' to million-dollar math problem
OpenAI's controversial claim to have cracked the Navier-Stokes existence-and-smoothness problem has sent shock waves through the mathematics community.
By Benjamin Skuse Edited by Ben Turner, Laura Mondragón
Published September 17, 2026
In News
The panellists of the Heidelberg Laureate Forum 2026's AI in Mathematics panel. From right to left: Jacob Tsimerman, Geordie Williamson, Peter Scholze, Michael Harris and moderator Tony Feng.
(Image credit: Bernhard Kreutzer for the Heidelberg Laureate Forum Foundation)
Share this article
5
Join the conversation
Follow us
Add us as a preferred source on Google
Newsletter
Subscribe to our newsletter
HEIDELBERG, Germany — Often considered the slowest, most methodical and most abstract of the sciences, mathematics usually advances so incrementally and esoterically that it rarely troubles the mainstream media.
It was therefore with some discomfort that a panel of elite mathematicians took to the stage Sept. 15 here at the Heidelberg Laureate Forum, a conference that unites young researchers with award-winning mathematicians and computer scientists. The focus of the panel: to confront the rapid rise of AI, whose threat to their quiet discipline has thrust them into the limelight.
In the past year alone, AI systems have made substantial contributions to the solutions of dozens of problems posed by prolific Hungarian mathematician Paul Erdős, conducted publishable doctoral-level research, formally verified two proofs that had previously won their authors the Fields Medal (an award considered equivalent to a Nobel Prize in mathematics) and made progress on 10 other long-standing tough open problems.
AI Maths Video
0 seconds of 1 minute, 53 secondsVolume 0%
Then, on Sept. 8, OpenAI made the bombshell claim that it had deployed 10,000 AI agents to solve the Navier-Stokes existence-and-smoothness problem, one of seven fiendishly difficult Millennium Prize Problems posed by the Clay Mathematics Institute in the year 2000 (of which only one, the Poincaré conjecture, has been solved to the institute's satisfaction until now). The prize for solving any of these problems is $1 million.
Crucially, mathematicians Tristan Buckmaster and Levent Alpöge had been working on the Navier-Stokes problem for roughly a year when they alleged that OpenAI found out about their work and raced to scoop them, claiming that an OpenAI representative threatened them not to go public.
YOU MAY LIKE
Did OpenAI really crack one of math's hardest unsolved problems —‬ and did it play fair to get there?
'This is what happened with Claude and me': AI's failed attempt to crack the Riemann hypothesis led mathematician to a breakthrough
Nobel Prize-winning physicist and team use Claude AI to solve decades-old math puzzle
It is in the bow wave of this news that the Heidelberg Laureate Forum panelists debated the controversy surrounding what the rise of AI means for the future of their discipline. Addressing the OpenAI announcement head-on from the outset was Michael Harris, a professor of mathematics at Columbia University.
"There's no legal obstacle to the kind of predatory behavior that we've seen particularly over the last month, in the same way there was no legal obstacle in the 19th century to … the violent acquisition of territory by colonial powers," he said.
Sign up for the Live Science daily newsletter now
Get the world’s most fascinating discoveries delivered straight to your inbox.
Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands
Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors
By submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over.
Harris broke the OpenAI Navier-Stokes story on his Substack newsletter Silicon Reckoner, largely to reveal what he views as an important controversy relating to how OpenAI may have used Buckmaster and Alpöge's research.
Harris, who describes the big tech companies developing AI as "gangsters," would like to see a regulatory framework implemented to protect mathematics and mathematicians from similar actions in future. In the meantime, "those who act in a way that's destructive of the community should not be considered members of good standing," he suggested.
Though this sentiment was shared by fellow panellist Geordie Williamson of the University of Sydney, 2026 Fields Medalist Jacob Tsimerman, a professor of mathematics at the University of Toronto who in July joined OpenAI as an AI safety researcher, was keen to highlight the magnitude of the achievement by the company's internal AI model.
WHAT TO READ NEXT
No, OpenAI's models didn't go 'rogue' when they broke into Hugging Face. Here's what really happened.
We're not about to awaken an evil digital god — AI is far more likely to end in a great disappointment
AI agents resorted to crime and self-destruction to survive in a simulated world — but does this mean they would do the same in the real world?
"I do think the top line is getting buried a little bit," he said. "AI has solved a Millennium [Prize] Problem, and I don't think it's had the kind of effect of at least informing people of AI's capabilities that it's meant to have had."
Tsimerman is highly focused on AI safety at OpenAI and his newly formed independent nonprofit, the Mathematical AI Safety Institute. He believes OpenAI's Navier-Stokes announcement represents a watershed moment in how mathematics is conducted, and by whom.
"If we put our value in human beings doing research in mathematics at the frontier level, developing expertise and slowly making progress, then I think that's coming to an end," he said during a separate news conference held at the forum. "If we put our value in new mathematics being created, and it both serving society and giving mathematicians something to study, then that seems like a golden age."
Peter Scholze, co-director of the Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in Germany and a 2018 Fields Medalist, had a completely different perspective. Dismissing the OpenAI Navier-Stokes news as "some kind of PR," he stated that the point of the Millennium Prize Problems is not just to solve one math problem but to bring a fresh perspective to a host of related open questions in a way that builds human understanding ‪—‬ something that a long, machine-produced proof is unlikely to deliver.
RELATED STORIES
AI is solving 'impossible' math problems. Can it best the world's top mathematicians?
No, OpenAI's models didn't go 'rogue' when they broke into Hugging Face. Here's what really happened.
'Why would you ruin your career?': OpenAI claims to have cracked one of math's greatest unsolved problems, but mathematicians allege it played dirty
Moreover, Scholze — who confessed to never having prompted a large language model and proudly showed off his "dumb phone" to the audience — said AI largely just accelerates mathematical progress, which is in his opinion of little value when it is already impossible to acquire a genuine understanding of all the progress that has been made.
So where does all of this leave mathematics and mathematicians? A number of initiatives ‪—‬ such as Proofs and Prompts, Mathematical Discourse, and the Association for Human Mathematics ‪—‬ aim to preserve a kernel of human mathematics so the field can continue to be a home for human culture and understanding.
But for all the panelists, the speed of change and advancement in AI means they cannot offer clear predictions of the impacts of these initiatives or what the field might look like in the future.
"To be honest, whenever anyone talks about 10 years from now, or even five years from now … it just seems unfathomably far away," Tsimerman said. "The world in two years is going to look so incredibly different than it does now."
Benjamin Skuse
Live Science contributor
Benjamin Skuse is a professional freelance writer of all things science and technology. Previously, he earned a PhD in applied mathematics from the University of Edinburgh and an MSc in science communication from the University of the West of England. His work has appeared in New Scientist, WIRED, IEEE Spectrum, Physics World, Sky & Telescope, Photonics Focus, and many more outlets.
READ MORE
MATHEMATICS
'This is what happened with Claude and me': AI's failed attempt to crack the Riemann hypothesis led mathematician to a breakthrough
MATHEMATICS
Nobel Prize-winning physicist and team use Claude AI to solve decades-old math puzzle
MATHEMATICS
Mathematicians say these 60-sided dice are the fairest in the world
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
We're not about to awaken an evil digital god — AI is far more likely to end in a great disappointment
LATEST IN MATHEMATICS
MATHEMATICS
'This is what happened with Claude and me': AI's failed attempt to crack the Riemann hypothesis led mathematician to a breakthrough
MATHEMATICS
Did OpenAI really crack one of math's hardest unsolved problems —‬ and did it play fair to get there?
MATHEMATICS
Mathematicians say these 60-sided dice are the fairest in the world
MATHEMATICS
Mathematician Hong Wang becomes third woman to win the Fields Medal, one of the world’s most prestigious math prizes
LATEST IN NEWS
AGING
Your voice may reveal how fast you're aging, new AI 'speech clock' suggests
PHYSICS & MATHEMATICS
Physicists unveil the most accurate atomic clock ever ‪—‬ and it could literally redefine the second
MATHEMATICS
'This is what happened with Claude and me': AI's failed attempt to crack the Riemann hypothesis led mathematician to a breakthrough
ALLIGATORS & CROCODILES
Watch the world's smallest crocodiles snatch bats in their hidden underground lair ‪—‬ a behavior never seen before
USEFUL LINKS
FEED YOUR CURIOSITY
Life's Little Mysteries Earth from space Diagnostic dilemmas Astonishing artifacts
GROW YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Jaw-dropping James Webb Space Telescope images Amazing women in science and math Explore the periodic table of elements Uncanny facial reconstructions from history
SCIENCE IN YOUR LIFE
Science quizzes and games Beginner's guide to wildlife photography The best telescopes for spotting stars and planets Mind-blowing science facts
Live Science is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site.
Add as a preferred source on Google
Accessibility Statement
Contact Future's Experts
About Us
Terms And Conditions
Privacy Policy
Cookies Policy
Advertise With Us
Web Notifications
Careers
Editorial Standards
How To Pitch A Story To Us
Do Not Sell Or Share My Personal Information
© Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036.