Italy Fines OpenAI €15 Million for ChatGPT GDPR Data Privacy Violations
 Ravie Lakshmanan  Dec 23, 2024 GDPR / Data Privacy
Italy's data protection authority has fined ChatGPT maker OpenAI a fine of €15 million ($15.66 million) over how the generative artificial intelligence application handles personal data.
The fine comes nearly a year after the Garante found that ChatGPT processed users' information to train its service in violation of the European Union's General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).
The authority said OpenAI did not notify it of a security breach that took place in March 2023, and that it processed the personal information of users to train ChatGPT without having an adequate legal basis to do so. It also accused the company of going against the principle of transparency and related information obligations toward users.
"Furthermore, OpenAI has not provided for mechanisms for age verification, which could lead to the risk of exposing children under 13 to inappropriate responses with respect to their degree of development and self-awareness," the Garante said.
Besides levying a €15 million fine, the company has been ordered to carry out a six-month-long communication campaign on radio, television, newspapers, and the internet to promote public understanding of how ChatGPT works.
This specifically includes the nature of data collected, both user and non-user information, for the purpose of training its models, and the rights that users can exercise to object, rectify, or delete that data.
"Through this communication campaign, users and non-users of ChatGPT will have to be made aware of how to oppose generative artificial intelligence being trained with their personal data and thus be effectively enabled to exercise their rights under the GDPR," the Garante added.
Italy was the first country to impose a temporary ban on ChatGPT in late March 2023, citing data protection concerns. Nearly a month later, access to ChatGPT was reinstated after the company addressed the issues raised by the Garante.
In a statement shared with the Associated Press, OpenAI called the decision disproportionate and that it intends to appeal, stating the fine is nearly 20 times the revenue it made in Italy during the time period. It further said it's committed to offering beneficial artificial intelligence that abides by users' privacy rights.
The ruling also follows an opinion from the European Data Protection Board (EDPB) that an AI model that unlawfully processes personal data but is subsequently anonymized prior to deployment does not constitute a violation of GDPR.
"If it can be demonstrated that the subsequent operation of the AI model does not entail the processing of personal data, the EDPB considers that the GDPR would not apply," the Board said . "Hence, the unlawfulness of the initial processing should not impact the subsequent operation of the model."
"Further, the EDPB considers that, when controllers subsequently process personal data collected during the deployment phase, after the model has been anonymised, the GDPR would apply in relation to these processing operations."
Earlier this month, the Board also published guidelines on handling data transfers outside non-European countries in a manner that complies with GDPR. The guidelines are subject to public consultation until January 27, 2025.
"Judgements or decisions from third countries authorities cannot automatically be recognised or enforced in Europe," it said . "If an organisation replies to a request for personal data from a third country authority, this data flow constitutes a transfer and the GDPR applies."
Found this article interesting? Follow us on Google News , Twitter and LinkedIn to read more exclusive content we post.
SHARE




 Tweet
 Share
 Share
 Share

 Share on Facebook
 Share on Twitter
 Share on Linkedin
 Share on Reddit
 Share on Hacker News
 Share on Email
 Share on WhatsApp
Share on Facebook Messenger
 Share on Telegram
SHARE 
AI Regulation , ChatGPT , cybersecurity , data privacy , GDPR , Italy , OpenAI
⚡ Top Stories This Week
Roundcube Pre-Auth SQL Injection Flaw Actively Exploited in the Wild
Cloudflare Fixes Flaw That Let One Container Read Another Customer's Leftover Disk Data
Unpatched OnePlus Flaws Let Installed Android Apps Gain Root Without Permissions
ThreatsDay: AI Search Poisoning, AI Coding Tool Leaking Repos, One-Click Code Execution and 13 More Stories
Placeholder third-party[.]com Referenced Across 1,700+ Repositories Now Serves Malicious Content
OpenAI Agent Bypassed Australian Medicare Portal Controls to Access Non-Public Files
A Leaked GitLab Issue Email Address Lets Anyone Push Code and Run CI Jobs as You
MikroTrick Chain Let Attackers Take Over MikroTik Routers Without a Password or SSH Key
New cPanel Flaw Lets a Hosting Account Run Code as Root, Take Full Server Control
Exploit Released for Unpatched Ubuntu Linux Flaw Enabling Host-Root Container Escape
F5 Patches Critical BIG-IP APM Zero-Day Exploited for Unauthenticated RCE on OAuth Servers
Critical Next.js ImageResponse Flaw Can Lead to Server Code Execution via Crafted SVG Input
ShinyHunters Claims FBI Breach, Says It Stole Data on Agents and Job Applicants
Check Point Warns of Management Server Zero-Day Exploited in Targeted Attacks
WordPress Issues Patch for Critical Flaw That Can Enable Code Execution on Some Servers
Researcher Drops BigDiskBuster Zero-Day PoC That Blocks Microsoft Defender Updates
New CVSS 10.0 VeloCloud Orchestrator Flaw Actively Exploited in Certificate-Based Setups
New Linux Kernel Flaw Gives ARM64 KVM Guests Read-Write Access to Host Memory
SharePoint Flaw Initially Listed as Spoofing by Microsoft Enables Authenticated RCE
One Hidden Meta Muse Setting Could Let Attackers Turn the AI Assistant Into a Backdoor
WordPress Comment2Shell Flaw Can Turn Anonymous Comment XSS Into RCE via Admin Session
Zyxel and Veeam Flaws Under Active Exploitation With Command and SYSTEM Access
Beyond ISO 27001: Building a Risk Program That Can Keep Up With AI
Secrets Sprawl Is an Identity Problem That AI Just Made Impossible to Ignore
⭐ Featured Resources
Validation Summit ’26: See How Pen Testing, Exposure Validation and BAS Work Together
Red Teams: Learn How Attack Path Chaining Changes Automated Security Testing
Turn Threat Intelligence Into Verified Risk With Threat-Led Penetration Testing
Deploy Browser Security Monitoring in Minutes With a Single Header