HOME
BUSINESS
NEWS
OpenAI Pauses Martin Luther King Jr. AI Videos, Saying Public Figures “Should Ultimately Have Control” Over Likeness
By Dade Hayes
Dade Hayes
Business Editor
@dadehayes
More Stories By Dade
Broadcast To Hit A Double, Peacock Going Deep In NBC Sports Coverage Of MLB Wild Card Playoffs
Paramount To Move Its Class B Shares From Nasdaq To New York Stock Exchange In Early October
Shares In Barry Diller’s People Inc. Surge On Report Of Role-Reversal Acquisition Bid From MGM Resorts
VIEW ALL
October 17, 2025 7:29am
ADD US AS A GOOGLE PREFERRED SOURCE
5
COMMENTS
Services to share this page.
Share on Facebook
Post
Show more sharing options
Martin Luther King Jr. in 1964
Evening Standard/Hulton Archive/Getty Images
After a storm of objections from IP owners over generative AI video model Sora 2, the estate of Martin Luther King, Jr. and OpenAI have agreed to pause images of King created by the platform.
In a joint statement issued Friday morning, the estate and the tech company cited the existence of “disrespectful depictions” of King. The release of Sora 2 in recent weeks has created a firestorm, with CAA, the MPA, major unions and other Hollywood stakeholders leveling harsh criticism of what they perceive as an existential threat.
More of a TikTok competitor than a long-form tool (at least upon initial adoption), the new Sora has prompted a flood of short videos using recognizable people across the internet over the past two weeks. With just a brief text prompt, users have been able to show King or a wide range of others (Fred Rogers, Tupac Shakur, Kobe Bryant) in made-up settings – the wackier the better for many users. King appeared in one video shilling for Burger King.
Watch on Deadline
Related Stories
Donald Trump Looks To Rebrand AI As "Super Intelligence" As CEOs Talk Of Self-Policing Accord
BBC Boss Matt Brittin Says He Was Sent A 'Doctor Who' Episode Entirely Generated By AI: "It Was Pretty Good"
For Hollywood, the new video tool is not just a lark, as the “training” of video models on existing material is seen as undermining the original work. AI companies rely on “fair use” laws to protect them, and the legal framework of AI is not yet firmly established, copyright experts say. Lawsuits have been filed against smaller AI firms but not yet against OpenAI, which is now valued at $500 billion.
Last month, as OpenAI prepared to release the game-changing Sora update, the company notified copyright holders that they would need to opt out of Sora 2 if they wished to withhold their property from being used to train the model. Several major IP owners, among them Disney, did just that before OpenAI CEO Sam Altman walked back the initial policy, assuring copyright holders that they would get more “granular control” over their work.
“Some users generated disrespectful depictions of Dr. King’s image,” the statement said. “So at King, Inc.’s request, OpenAI has paused generations depicting Dr. King as it strengthens guardrails for historical figures. While there are strong free speech interests in depicting historical figures, OpenAI believes public figures and their families should ultimately have control over how their likeness is used. Authorized representatives or estate owners can request that their likeness not be used in Sora cameos. OpenAI thanks Dr. Bernice A. King for reaching out on behalf of King, Inc., and John Hope Bryant and the AI Ethics Council for creating space for conversations like this.”
While virtually all of society and the corporate world have been upended by the arrival of AI, Hollywood is in a particularly fraught situation with Sora and other video models. The industry, already facing economic pressure, has begun implementing AI in various phases of production, particularly in below-the-line areas like visual effects. At the same time, studios and streamers are approaching the next negotiating window with major above-the-line unions, with AI at the top of the list of issues to be raised by labor leaders. In 2023, just months after OpenAI released ChatGPT, the WGA and SAG-AFTRA both went on strike, in part over fears that AI would result in job losses.
In April, lawmakers reintroduced a bill, the No Fakes Act, that would give individuals the right to control their digital likenesses. A provision of the proposed legislation includes a post-mortem digital replication right that can be transferred and licensed by heirs, executors and others. It terminates 70 years after an individual’s passing. OpenAI has supported the bill. Addressing concerns of the studios, the legislation includes exclusions for projects such as documentaries and biographical works, or for purposes of comment, criticism, or parody, among others.
Ted Johnson contributed to this report.
Must Read Stories
HIDE ARTICLES
‘Spider-Man’ Series Based On Comics’ Clone Saga Storyline Nears Amazon Green Light
Disney Hit With A Couple Hundred Layoffs As CEO D’Amaro Tightens Belt
Tom Cruise Explodes In ‘Digger,’ Iñárritu’s Surprising Disaster Pic Satire
Curry Barker’s ‘Anything But Ghosts’ & ‘GoT: Aegon’s Conquest’ Set
READ MORE ABOUT:
AI
MARTIN LUTHER KING JR.
OPENAI
SORA 2
TECHLINE
5 Comments
Subscribe to Deadline
Get our Breaking News Alerts and Keep your inbox happy.
Sign Up
5 Comments
Anonymous
on October 17, 2025 8:44 am
The media keeps saying that the public has “fear” of AI. It’s not fear, it’s fear of humans using for bad, which is inevitable.
Unless it cures cancer, it’s all bad.
Anonymous
on October 17, 2025 8:22 am
What a colossal waste of money and resources. AI might be the biggest scam ever perpetrated.
Vva
on October 17, 2025 7:56 am
So pausing only on King? Why not any public figure? This is a bandaid on an open wound.
Pfon71361
on October 17, 2025 7:37 am
Houmorous or honorific depictions of public figures, so long as they aren’t defamatory, should be permitted. However, even with strict guardrails, abuses can and will still occur.
AWT
on October 17, 2025 9:48 am
Who decides what is considered defamatory?
Sidebar
Trending on Deadline
1 Charlie & Martin Sheen To Star As Father & Son In Comedy Series ‘Happy Jack’ For AMC
2 Disney Hit By Layoffs, A Couple Hundred Workers Cut
3 'Spider-Man' Sony Universe TV Series Based On Clone Saga Marvel Comics Storyline Nears Amazon Green Light
4 Jennifer Lawrence Boards Zach Cregger's Original Sci-Fi New Line Pic 'The Flood'
5 Curry Barker's Next Movie 'Anything But Ghosts' Sets May 2027 Release From Focus Features
6 Former 'American Idol' Contestant Caleb Flynn Found Guilty In Murder Of Wife Ashley
7 Wayne Brady Withdraws From Off Broadway Production On Doctor's Orders; Ato Blankson-Wood Joins 'Ms. Blakk For President'
8 Jeremy Clarkson Working On "Unbelievably Ambitious" Show Amid Uncertainty Over 'Clarkson's Farm' Future
9 'Game Of Thrones: Aegon's Conquest' Movie Gets 2029 Release Date
10 Lucien Laviscount & Taylour Paige To Topline Netflix Thriller 'Tyler Perry's Confabulation'
Deadline
Signup for Breaking News Alerts & Newsletters
Your Email
SIGN UP
By providing your information, you agree to our Terms of Use and our Privacy Policy. We use vendors that may also process your information to help provide our services. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA Enterprise and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
Latest Business News
Trump "Very Close" To Unveiling AI Czar, Praises Techlords Inking "Morally Binding" Self-Regulation Pact
Producers Guild Elects Donna Gigliotti And Mike Farah As Its New Presidents
'Love Me' Artist JMSN Fires Off Cease-And-Desist Letter Over Use Of Song In Taxpayer-Funded Spot Touting Donald Trump
List Of Hollywood & Media Layoffs From Paramount To Warner Bros Discovery To CNN & More
Marketplace