SKIP NAVIGATION
MARKETS
BUSINESS
INVESTING
TECH
POLITICS & POLICY
VIDEO
INVESTING CLUB
PRO
LIVESTREAM
Search quotes, news & videos
WATCHLIST
SIGN IN
CREATE FREE ACCOUNT
2026 LIST
METHODOLOGY
2025 LIST
2024 LIST
2023 LIST
NEWSLETTER
CNBC DISRUPTOR 50
Anthropic gives $20 million to group pushing for AI regulations ahead of 2026 elections
PUBLISHED THU, FEB 12 20267:42 AM ESTUPDATED THU, FEB 12 20261:36 PM EST
Emily Wilkins
@EMRWILKINS
SHARE
Share Article via Facebook
Share Article via Twitter
Share Article via LinkedIn
Share Article via Email
KEY POINTS
Anthropic announced a $20 million donation to Public First Action, a group supporting AI guardrails.
Public First Action plans to back 30 to 50 candidate from both parties in state and federal races.
The group launched ad buys on Thursday for Republicans Marsha Blackburn of Tennessee and Pete Ricketts of Nebraska.
The Anthropic AI logo is displayed on a mobile phone with a visual digital background.
Nurphoto | Nurphoto | Getty Images
Anthropic, the artificial intelligence lab that’s taken heat from the White House for its support of regulations and safety, is putting $20 million into the political arena ahead of the 2026 elections.
The company said on Thursday that it’s donating to Public First Action, a group that’s challenging the AI industry by supporting candidates across the political aisle. The group has just launched six-figure ad buys to back pro-AI regulation candidates Marsha Blackburn of Tennessee and Pete Ricketts from Nebraska, both Republicans.
Blackburn, a U.S. senator now running for governor of her state, has led kids online safety bills, while Ricketts, who’s running for re-election, introduced legislation this year to limit advanced U.S. chips from being sold to China.
Public First Action is headed by former lawmakers Brad Carson and Chris Stewart. Carson told CNBC in an interview that the group aims to support about 30 to 50 candidates this cycle, and plans to raise between $50 million to $75 million.
That’s far less than the $125 million raised so far by pro-AI PAC Leading the Future, whose donors include tech investment firm Andreessen Horowitz, OpenAI co-founder Greg Brockman, venture capitalists Joe Lonsdale, angel investor Ron Conway and AI software startup Perplexity.
Carson said public opinion is on his side. A Gallup survey published in September found 80% of respondents wanted rules for AI safety and data security, even if that means slowing development of the technology.
“Leading the future is driven by three billionaires who are close to Donald Trump” with a “particular view of how AI regulation should go and want to kind of buy it off,” Carson said. “We believe it should be more democratically accountable.”
In a blog post, Anthropic said policy is needed to “keep the risks in check” as well as “maintaining meaningful safeguards, promoting job growth, protecting children, and demanding real transparency from the companies building the most powerful AI models.”
David Sacks, President Trump’s AI and crypto czar, criticized Anthropic in October, after Jack Clark, one of the startup’s co-founders and its current head of policy, published an essay called “Technological Optimism and Appropriate Fear,” which sparked a debate over AI regulation online.
Sacks posted on X that Anthropic was “running a sophisticated regulatory capture strategy based on fear-mongering.” He said the company is “principally responsible for the state regulatory frenzy that is damaging the startup ecosystem.”
Two months later, President Trump signed an executive order issuing a single regulation framework for AI, undermining the power of individual states, namely Democratic-led states like California and New York.
Correction: This story has been revised to reflect that the group launched ad buys to back Pete Ricketts from Nebraska. A previous version misspelled his last name.
WATCH: CNBC’s full interview with David Sacks
WATCH NOW
VIDEO15:12
Watch CNBC’s full interview with White House AI & crypto czar David Sacks
Choose CNBC as your preferred source on Google and never miss a moment from the most trusted name in business news.
RELATED
Anduril: No. 4 on this year’s CNBC Disruptor 50 list
Cyber startup Island hits $6.4 billion valuation in new round as AI attacks fuel spending wave
2026 CNBC Disruptor 50: See the full list of companies, rankings, and a new leader in the AI race
Whatnot valued at $20 billion as live shopping continues to boom
5 biggest risks of sharing your DNA with consumer genetic-testing companies
MORE IN CNBC DISRUPTOR 50
2026 CNBC Disruptor 50 list: Why Anthropic was No. 1 in this year’s rankings
Julia Boorstin
2026 CNBC Disruptor 50: See the full list of companies, rankings, and a new leader in the AI race
CNBC.com staff
2026 CNBC Disruptor 50 list: How we chose this year’s companies
David Spiegel
READ MORE
Subscribe to CNBC PRO
Subscribe to Investing Club
Licensing & Reprints
CNBC Councils
Select Personal Finance
Join the CNBC Panel
Closed Captioning
Digital Products
News Releases
Internships
Corrections
About CNBC
Site Map
Podcasts
Careers
Help
Contact
News Tips
Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.
GET IN TOUCH
CNBC Newsletters
Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inbox
SIGN UP NOW
Get this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services.
Advertise With Us
PLEASE CONTACT US
Ad Choices
Privacy Policy
Your Privacy Choices
CA Notice
Terms of Service
© 2026 Versant Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Versant Media Company.
Data is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.
Market Data Terms of Use and Disclaimers
Data also provided by
This site is now part of Versant. By continuing, you agree to our Terms. You also acknowledge that our updated Privacy Policy applies, including your existing data. For info on your data rights, click “Your Privacy Choices” or see “Your Rights” in our Privacy Policy.
We and our partners also use tools on this site to provide the services, personalize your experience, and for analytics, marketing, and advertising. If you previously opted out of selling, sharing, or targeted advertising on this site, you will need to update your Privacy Choice.
Your Privacy Choices Continue