Post
Log in Sign up
Post
Log in Sign up
Sam Altman on X: "a few quick updates about safety at openai:
as we said last july, we’re committed to allocating at least 20% of the computing resources to safety efforts across the entire company.
our team has been working with the US AI Safety Institute on an agreement where we would provide early access to our next foundation model so that we can work together to push forward the science of AI evaluations. excited for this!
finally, we want current and former employees to be able to raise concerns and feel comfortable doing so. this is crucial for any company, but for us especially and an important part of our safety plan. in may, we voided non-disparagement terms for current and former employees and provisions that gave openai the right (although it was never used) to cancel vested equity. we’ve worked hard to make it right."
Sam Altman
@sama
a few quick updates about safety at openai:
as we said last july, we’re committed to allocating at least 20% of the computing resources to safety efforts across the entire company.
our team has been working with the US AI Safety Institute on an agreement where we would provide early access to our next foundation model so that we can work together to push forward the science of AI evaluations. excited for this!
finally, we want current and former employees to be able to raise concerns and feel comfortable doing so. this is crucial for any company, but for us especially and an important part of our safety plan. in may, we voided non-disparagement terms for current and former employees and provisions that gave openai the right (although it was never used) to cancel vested equity. we’ve worked hard to make it right.
Readers added context they thought people might want to know Readers added context
"We’re starting a new team, co-led by Ilya Sutskever and Jan Leike, and dedicating 20% of the compute we’ve secured to date to this effort."
The announcement post is very clear that the compute was meant for the Superalignment team only.
openai.com/index/introduc…
Context is written by people who use X, and appears when rated helpful by others. Find out more .
4:34 AM · Aug 1, 2024 · 900.7K
Views
697 6 9 7
240 2 4 0
3.7K 3 . 7 K
438 4 3 8