SKIP NAVIGATION
MARKETS
BUSINESS
INVESTING
TECH
POLITICS & POLICY
VIDEO
INVESTING CLUB
PRO
LIVESTREAM
Search quotes, news & videos
WATCHLIST
SIGN IN
CREATE FREE ACCOUNT
2026 LIST
METHODOLOGY
2025 LIST
2024 LIST
2023 LIST
NEWSLETTER
CNBC DISRUPTOR 50
OpenAI wins $200 million U.S. defense contract
PUBLISHED MON, JUN 16 20256:15 PM EDTUPDATED MON, JUN 16 20258:15 PM EDT
Jordan Novet
@IN/JORDANNOVET/
SHARE
Share Article via Facebook
Share Article via Twitter
Share Article via LinkedIn
Share Article via Email
KEY POINTS
The Defense Department has awarded a one-year $200 million contract to OpenAI for the use of its artificial intelligence models.
Most of the work will take place in the Washington, D.C. area.
In December, OpenAI announced a partnership with defense tech startup Anduril to deploy advanced AI systems for “national security missions.”
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman speaks during the Snowflake Summit in San Francisco on June 2, 2025.
Justin Sullivan | Getty Images News | Getty Images
OpenAI has been awarded a $200 million contract to provide the U.S. Defense Department with artificial intelligence tools.
The department announced the one-year contract on Monday, months after OpenAI said it would collaborate with defense technology startup Anduril to deploy advanced AI systems for “national security missions.”
“Under this award, the performer will develop prototype frontier AI capabilities to address critical national security challenges in both warfighting and enterprise domains,” the Defense Department said. It’s the first contract with OpenAI listed on the Department of Defense’s website.
Anduril received a $100 million defense contract in December. Weeks earlier, OpenAI rival Anthropic said it would work with Palantir
and Amazon
to supply its AI models to U.S. defense and intelligence agencies.
Sam Altman, OpenAI’s co-founder and CEO, said in a discussion with OpenAI board member and former National Security Agency leader Paul Nakasone at a Vanderbilt University event in April that “we have to and are proud to and really want to engage in national security areas.”
In a blog post, OpenAI said the contract represents the first arrangement in a new initiative named OpenAI for Government, which includes the existing ChatGPT Gov product. OpenAI for Government will give U.S. government bodies access custom AI models for national security, support and product roadmap information.
“This contract, with a $200 million ceiling, will bring OpenAI’s industry-leading expertise to help the Defense Department identify and prototype how frontier AI can transform its administrative operations, from improving how service members and their families get health care, to streamlining how they look at program and acquisition data, to supporting proactive cyber defense,” the company said. “All use cases must be consistent with OpenAI’s usage policies and guidelines.”
The Defense Department specified that the contract is with OpenAI Public Sector LLC, and that the work will mostly occur in the National Capital Region, which encompasses Washington, D.C., and several nearby counties in Maryland and Virginia.
Meanwhile, OpenAI is working to build additional computing power in the U.S. In January, Altman appeared alongside President Donald Trump at the White House to announce the $500 billion Stargate project to build AI infrastructure in the U.S.
The new contract will represent a small portion of revenue at OpenAI, which is generating over $10 billion in annualized sales. In March, the company announced a $40 billion financing round at a $300 billion valuation.
In April, Microsoft
, which supplies cloud infrastructure to OpenAI, said the U.S. Defense Information Systems Agency has authorized the use of the Azure OpenAI service with secret classified information.
WATCH: OpenAI hits $10 billion in annual recurring revenue
WATCH NOW
VIDEO03:18
OpenAI hits $10 billion in annual recurring revenue
Choose CNBC as your preferred source on Google and never miss a moment from the most trusted name in business news.
RELATED
Cyber startup Island hits $6.4 billion valuation in new round as AI attacks fuel spending wave
2026 CNBC Disruptor 50: See the full list of companies, rankings, and a new leader in the AI race
5 biggest risks of sharing your DNA with consumer genetic-testing companies
2025 Disruptor 50: See full list of companies leading new era of AI breakthroughs and riches
Whatnot valued at $20 billion as live shopping continues to boom
MORE IN CNBC DISRUPTOR 50
2026 CNBC Disruptor 50 list: Why Anthropic was No. 1 in this year’s rankings
Julia Boorstin
2026 CNBC Disruptor 50: See the full list of companies, rankings, and a new leader in the AI race
CNBC.com staff
2026 CNBC Disruptor 50 list: How we chose this year’s companies
David Spiegel
READ MORE
Subscribe to CNBC PRO
Subscribe to Investing Club
Licensing & Reprints
CNBC Councils
Select Personal Finance
Join the CNBC Panel
Closed Captioning
Digital Products
News Releases
Internships
Corrections
About CNBC
Site Map
Podcasts
Careers
Help
Contact
News Tips
Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.
GET IN TOUCH
CNBC Newsletters
Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inbox
SIGN UP NOW
Get this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services.
Advertise With Us
PLEASE CONTACT US
Ad Choices
Privacy Policy
Your Privacy Choices
CA Notice
Terms of Service
© 2026 Versant Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Versant Media Company.
Data is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.
Market Data Terms of Use and Disclaimers
Data also provided by
This site is now part of Versant. By continuing, you agree to our Terms. You also acknowledge that our updated Privacy Policy applies, including your existing data. For info on your data rights, click “Your Privacy Choices” or see “Your Rights” in our Privacy Policy.
We and our partners also use tools on this site to provide the services, personalize your experience, and for analytics, marketing, and advertising. If you previously opted out of selling, sharing, or targeted advertising on this site, you will need to update your Privacy Choice.
Your Privacy Choices Continue