NETWORKS & DIGITAL WARFARE
‘OpenAI For Government’ launches with $200M win from Pentagon CDAO
A new OpenAI initiative will also “consolidate” the company’s existing work with government clients like the Air Force Research Laboratory, NASA, Los Alamos and the Treasury Department.
By Sydney J. Freedberg Jr. on June 17, 2025 2:00 pm
Share
In this photo illustration, the OpenAI (Open AI) logo is seen displayed on a smartphone screen. (Photo Illustration by Thomas Fuller/SOPA Images/LightRocket via Getty Images)
WASHINGTON — OpenAI has won a Pentagon contract worth up to $200 million to “develop prototype frontier AI” for the Defense Department, for both back-office business functions and frontline warfighting operations, DoD and the company announced late Monday.
According to the DoD announcement, just under $2 million is already being legally “obligated” to OpenAI “at the time of award,” and the full project has “an estimated completion date of July 2026.” That’s a stark contrast to many of the Pentagon’s other big-ticket IT contracts, which boast huge headline numbers but, when examined more closely, spread the award out over multiple years — in some cases, even a decade — and guarantee pay-out of only a small percentage, with the rest locked behind contract options that DoD may or may not actually exercise.
It’s also significant that the award specifies the Chief Digital & AI Officer (CDAO) will be the “contracting activity” for DoD. CDAO was created in 2022 to merge existing AI efforts run by the Office of the Secretary of Defense and to serve as a central hub providing expertise, services, and supporting “infrastructure” for AI projects across the armed services and defense agencies. But CDAO has key billets left empty after the Biden-Trump transition, and there have been rumors it might be cut or consolidated with other Pentagon innovation efforts. Managing this major contract hardly guarantees CDAO’s survival, but it helps.
The announcements included few details on what OpenAI is building, but a CDAO official told Breaking Defense on Tuesday that it will go beyond the Pentagon’s existing Large Language Model (LLM) capabilities to “prototype agentic workflows,” essentially semi-autonomous AI “agents,” like virtual personal assistants, that can complete mundane tasks hitherto handled by humans.
And more is yet to come: “This award is another step on our journey toward accelerating the adoption of advanced AI,” the official said. “In the coming weeks, we will announce partnerships with other frontier AI companies as well.”
High Hopes, Deep Skepticism
LAND WARFARE
The Army’s Digital Transformation
AI is reshaping the Army’s approach to cyber, electronic warfare and command and control. At TechNet Augusta 2026, leaders outlined how they’re turning emerging technology into capabilities for the battlefield.
By Breaking Defense
The award also has significance for OpenAI beyond its $200 million face value, which equals just 2 percent of the company’s claimed $10 billion annual recurring revenue. Clearly anticipating further contracts, the former nonprofit, whose ChatGPT model launched the current tidal wave of generative artificial intelligence two and a half years ago, used the occasion to officially launch what it calls “OpenAI For Government.”
Described as an “initiative” rather than a formal business unit, OpenAI For Government will coordinate the new CDAO contract, future work with federal, state, and local agencies, and an array of preexisting projects. The company’s current government partners range from the Air Force Research Lab and Energy Department National Laboratories (including Los Alamos) to civilian entities like NIH, DHS, and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
“We’re supporting the U.S. government’s efforts in adopting best-in-class technology and deploying these tools in service of the public good,” OpenAI said in its announcement. “Our goal is to unlock AI solutions that enhance the capabilities of government workers, help them cut down on the red tape and paperwork, and let them do more of what they come to work each day to do: serve the American people.”
“This project with CDAO marks a major milestone for OpenAI for Government and a meaningful step as we expand our work in the public sector,” said OpenAI national security lead Katrina Mulligan in a statement. “CDAO is also creating a framework for how OpenAI’s leading expertise can be used to develop and test solutions to support the Department of Defense” in other ways.
“All use cases must be consistent with OpenAI’s usage policies and guidelines, which prohibit its use for the development or use of weapons,” an OpenAI official added.
Besides the widespread concerns about militarized AI, there’s also skepticism whether generative AIs like OpenAI’s ChatGPT are trustworthy enough for use within government. They have been known to provide subtly distorted or outright false information (known as “hallucinations”) and for failing common logic puzzles or even basic math tests that older forms of AI can handle easily without error. Experts still debate whether these problems are fixable or inherent in how LLMs process information.
But the Defense Department, like private industry, has seen tremendous opportunity to use LLMs to find patterns in vast quantities of unorganized, “unstructured” data — everything from work emails and procurement contracts to military field manuals — and output good-enough summaries for workers in seconds.
That’s especially valuable for DoD civilians and military personnel, who must constantly comply with reams of bafflingly worded regulations that would take humans years to read, let alone to master. The Army has even used GenAI to draft official acquisition documents and to translate the text of Presidential Drawdown Orders into actionable entries in its internal tracking system of which exact equipment to send to Ukraine.
In mid-2023, the Pentagon launched Task Force Lima, run by CDAO, to assess the reliability and value of the new wave of AI. After almost 18 months of intensive study, it effectively gave the technology its blessing — albeit with extensive technical guardrails and procedural precautions — in December 2024. But skepticism about GenAI remains deeply embedded in the Defense Department, with the Marine Corps issuing official guidance just last fall to “distrust and verify all outputs prior to use.”
Updated Tuesday, June 17 at 3:50 pm EST with CDAO comment and at 6:17 pm EST with OpenAI comment.
Topics: artificial intelligence AI Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Officer CDAO cyber security large language models LLMs networks OpenAI Pentagon technology
More from Breaking Defense
DIU, Space Force team up to kick-start buys of commercial sats for monitoring GEO
How readiness stays ready: The F110 delivers power, reliability and scale for the F-15EX
US, UK test SM-6, other missiles on SINKEX target frigate
UK to gather defense CEOs for ‘closed-door’ Russian security briefing
SPONSORED POST,
LAND WARFARE
Bombardier Defense, your trusted, mission-focused partner
A commitment to long-term operational value.
By Bombardier Defense
Recommended
If Washington is going to be a shareholder, it should act like one
As private investment in defense increases, some bottlenecks in funding: AIA-Bain
Building logistics networks that survive contested environments
NETWORKS & DIGITAL WARFARE
Building logistics networks for contested environments
Explore how software, edge AI and resilient connectivity can strengthen military logistics in contested environments. Join Breaking Defense on Oct. 21 and earn 1 CPE credit.
By Breaking Defense
SPONSORED POST,
NETWORKS & DIGITAL WARFARE
In the age of drones, a bigger fence around your facility doesn’t protect you anymore
Traditional thinking about how to protect facilities must adapt to new threats such as drones or downstream attacks.
By Breaking Defense