OPENAI
AI
NEWS
OpenAI won’t watermark ChatGPT text because its users could get caught
Some ChatGPT users said they’d use ChatGPT less if it included watermarks.
by
Wes Davis
Aug 5, 2024, 12:18 AM UTC
74
74
Comments (All New)
Image: The Verge
Part Of
From ChatGPT to Gemini: how AI is rewriting the internet
SEE ALL UPDATES
OpenAI has had a system for watermarking ChatGPT-created text and a tool to detect the watermark ready for about a year, reports The Wall Street Journal. But the company is divided internally over whether to release it. On one hand, it seems like the responsible thing to do; on the other, it could hurt its bottom line.
OpenAI’s watermarking is described as adjusting how the model predicts the most likely words and phrases that will follow previous ones, creating a detectable pattern. (That’s a simplification, but you can check out Google’s more in-depth explanation for Gemini’s text watermarking for more).
RelatedOpenAI is adding new watermarks to DALL-E 3
Offering any way to detect AI-written material is a potential boon for teachers trying to deter students from turning over writing assignments to AI. The Journal reports that the company found watermarking didn’t affect the quality of its chatbot’s text output. In a survey the company commissioned, “people worldwide supported the idea of an AI detection tool by a margin of four to one,” the Journal writes.
After the Journal published its story, OpenAI confirmed it’s worked on watermarking text in a blog post update today that was spotted by TechCrunch. In it, the company says its method is very accurate (“99.9% effective,” according to documents the Journal saw) and resistant to “tampering, such as paraphrasing.” But it says techniques like rewording with another model make it “trivial to circumvention by bad actors.” The company also says it’s concerned about the stigmatization AI tools’ usefulness for non-native speakers.
But it seems OpenAI is also worried that using watermarking could turn off surveyed ChatGPT users, almost 30 percent of whom evidently told the company that they’d use the software less if watermarking was implemented.
Despite that, some employees still reportedly feel that watermarking is effective.
Subscribe to The Verge to continue reading.
More in: From ChatGPT to Gemini: how AI is rewriting the internet
Zuck doesn’t want to press pause on AI.
SEAN HOLLISTERSEP 1626
YouTube’s AI chatbot can make your next video thumbnail.
RICHARD LAWLERJUL 241
Common Sense Media says that Google’s AI search is unsafe for kids, with no way for parents and teachers to turn it off.
EMMA ROTHJUL 164
MOST POPULAR
Most Popular
Home Assistant says ‘Big tech ruined the cloud, so we’re out’
Keurig’s new machine uses plastic-free compressed coffee pucks
HP’s answer to the MacBook Neo is thinner, lighter, and comes with OLED
The People of Utah vs. Kevin O’Leary
Nacon’s new PS5 controller can mix audio from your phone and console
The Verge Daily
A free daily digest of the news that matters most.
Email (required)
SIGN UP
More in OpenAI
OpenAI’s Dot agent is enterprise software that can also order your dinner
Breaking up (with Elon Musk) is hard to do
OpenAI’s new agent is a shot at Meta — but can it compete with free?
The AI Tamagotchis are coming
Here’s what AI leaders are saying about Trump’s new safety plan
Here’s how tech leaders will self-police AI safety under Trump’s deal
ADVERTISER CONTENT FROM
This is the title for the native ad
Top Stories
OCT 2
OpenAI’s Dot agent is enterprise software that can also order your dinner
OCT 2
If a data center is camouflaged in the woods, will anyone hate it?
OCT 1
The People of Utah vs. Kevin O’Leary
OCT 2
Home Assistant says ‘Big tech ruined the cloud, so we’re out’
OCT 2
AI hallucinations are making entitled customers even worse