OpenAI o3 and o4-mini Usage Limits on ChatGPT and the API | OpenAI Help Center
• All Collections
• ChatGPT
• OpenAI o3 and o4-mini Usage Limits on ChatGPT and the API
OpenAI o3 and o4-mini Usage Limits on ChatGPT and the API
Updated: last month
ChatGPT
If you have a ChatGPT Plus, Pro, Team, or Enterprise account, you can select OpenAI o3, o3-pro or o4-mini in the model selector at the top of the page.
With a ChatGPT Plus, Team or Enterprise account, you have access to 100 messages a week with o3, 100 messages a day with o4-mini-high, and 300 messages a day with o4-mini.
When you hit that limit, you'll see a pop-up and no longer be able to select the model from the drop-down menu.
You can check the date that your usage limits restarts at any time by highlighting the model name in the model picker drop-down. Your weekly usage limit resets every seven days after you send your first message. For example, if you start sending messages on September 12, your limit will reset on September 19 (00:00 UTC), regardless of when you reach the limit.
You can verify that your response used o3, or-pro, o4-mini-high, or o4-mini by checking at the top of the ChatGPT response or highlighting the regenerate button under the response.
Currently, there is no way to check how many messages you have used in your usage budget.
The ChatGPT Pro plan offers unlimited access to our OpenAI o3, o4-mini-high, and o4-mini models. However, usage must adhere to our Terms of Use , which prohibits, among other things:
• Abusive usage, such as automatically or programmatically extracting data.
• Sharing your account credentials or making your account available to anyone else.
• Reselling access or using ChatGPT to power third-party services.
We have guardrails in place to help prevent misuse and are always working to improve our systems. This may occasionally involve a temporary restriction on your usage. We will inform you when this happens, and if you think this might be a mistake, please don’t hesitate to reach out to our support team . If policy-violating behavior is not found, your access will be restored.
API
OpenAI o1, o3, o3-pro and o4-mini models are available to qualified API users on Paid usage tiers. View rate limits by tier in our platform documentation .
Learn more about your API usage tiers.
Was this article helpful?
Submit
ChatGPT API Service Status Cookie Preferences
We use cookies and similar technologies to deliver, maintain, improve our services and for security purposes.
Check our Cookie Policy for details. Click ‘Accept all’ to let OpenAI and partners use cookies for these purposes. Click ‘Reject all’ to say no to cookies, except those that are strictly necessary. You can change your cookie settings at any time by clicking the cookie preferences link at the bottom of the page.
Reject All Accept All
