English English
English English
Search for articles...
Table of contents
All Collections
ChatGPT
OpenAI o3 and o4-mini Usage Limits on ChatGPT and the API
OpenAI o3 and o4-mini Usage Limits on ChatGPT and the API
Table of contents
ChatGPT
If you have a ChatGPT Plus, Pro, Team, or Enterprise account, you can select o3 or o4-mini in the model selector at the top of the page.
With a ChatGPT Plus, Team or Enterprise account, you have access to 100 messages a week with o3, 300 messages a day with o4-mini, and 100 messages a day with o4-mini-high.
The ChatGPT Pro plan offers unlimited access to our o3, o4-mini, and 4o models. However, usage must adhere to our Terms of Use , which prohibits, among other things:
• Abusive usage, such as automatically or programmatically extracting data.
• Sharing your account credentials or making your account available to anyone else.
• Reselling access or using ChatGPT to power third-party services.
We expect to release OpenAI o3‑pro in a few weeks with full tool support. For now, Pro users can still access o1‑pro.
We have guardrails in place to help prevent misuse and we are always working to improve our systems. This may occasionally involve a temporary restriction on your usage. We will inform you when this happens, and if you think this might be a mistake, please don’t hesitate to reach out to our support team at help.openai.com using the widget at the bottom-right of this page. If policy-violating behavior is not found, your access will be restored.
When you hit that limit, you'll see a pop-up and no longer be able to select the model from the drop-down menu.
You can check the date that your usage limits restarts at any time by highlighting the model name in the model picker drop-down. Your weekly usage limit resets every seven days after you send your first message. For example, if you start sending messages on September 12, your limit will reset on September 19 (00:00 UTC), regardless of when you reach the limit.
You can verify that your response used o3 or o4-mini by checking at the top of the ChatGPT response.
You can also verify the model used in a response at any time by highlighting the regenerate button under the response.
Currently, there is no way to check how many messages you have used in your usage budget.
API
o1, o3, and o4-mini models are available to all API users on Paid usage tiers. View rate limits by tier in our platform documentation .
​
Learn more about your API usage tiers.
Related Articles
What is the ChatGPT model selector?
Using OpenAI o-series models and GPT-4o models on ChatGPT
OpenAI o3 and o4‑mini models – FAQ [ChatGPT Enterprise & Edu]
ChatGPT Enterprise & Edu - Release Notes
o4-mini in ChatGPT - FAQ
Did this answer your question?
😞 😐 😃
• ChatGPT
• API
• DALL·E
• Service Status
•
•
