In Brief
Posted:
4:39 PM PDT · September 28, 2026
Image Credits: Samuel Boivin/NurPhoto / Getty Images
•
• Lucas Ropek
OpenAI reportedly ditches model over safety concerns
OpenAI had planned to release yet another AI model next month but has decided to nix the release over safety concerns.
The Wall Street Journal reports that Astra 6.1 was scheduled to be released as soon as within the next few days. However, the model “showed higher levels of deception” than previous models and exhibited unsafe behavior, the Journal writes.
Saachi Jain, OpenAI’s head of safety systems, told the WSJ that the model tested poorly on alignment, a measure of how well the program adheres to human intent.
TechCrunch reached out to OpenAI for more information and will update the article if it responds.
Astra was released earlier this month and was hailed by OpenAI as its most powerful model yet.
Questions about safety have plagued the AI industry over the past several months — ever since the Hugging Face incident , in which an OpenAI agent broke free of its sandboxed environment and hacked several different companies. Since that incident, more models — including Anthropic’s Claude and Google’s Gemini — have been revealed to have exhibited similar behavior.
The deluge of concerning stories has, ironically, helped to push the policy conversation in the U.S. toward an outcome desired by top AI labs : the institution of new industry standards for AI safety and potentially a slowdown of the industry.
Companies like OpenAI and Anthropic have claimed that the concern here is safety, although another potential motivation posited by critics is that it could entrench the industry position of those companies at the detriment of less resourced firms.
Topics
AI , Astra , In Brief , OpenAI
October 13 – 15
San Francisco
Get 50% off a second pass
The Disrupt experience is meant to be shared. Get your pass and bring a colleague, partner, or peer at 50% off. Cover more ground by making connections, building momentum, and discovering what’s next in the startup ecosystem.
BOOK NOW
Newsletters
See More
Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news
TechCrunch Daily News
Every weekday and Sunday, you can get the best of TechCrunch’s coverage.
TechCrunch Mobility
TechCrunch Mobility is your destination for transportation news and insight.
Startups Weekly
Startups are the core of TechCrunch, so get our best coverage delivered weekly.
StrictlyVC
Provides movers and shakers with the info they need to start their day.
No newsletters selected.
Subscribe
By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice .
Related
•
AI
Here’s why OpenAI is absent from Nvidia’s industry-wide effort to end rogue AI agents
• Julie Bort
11 hours ago
•
AI
OpenAI takes on Microsoft with the launch of what feels a whole lot like ChatGPT’s own office suite
• Lucas Ropek
12 hours ago
•
AI
Nvidia launches new platform for reining in rogue AI agents
• Kirsten Korosec
1 day ago
Latest in AI
•
AI
America.gov gets really weird when you ask it about Minecraft, but it’s not a glitch
• Amanda Silberling
6 hours ago
•
In Brief
The internet is convinced Elon Musk’s xAI trolled OpenAI’s ‘Dots’ launch
• Julie Bort
7 hours ago
•
AI
OpenAI’s latest features take direct aim at the app store model
• Sarah Perez
10 hours ago