SKIP NAVIGATION
MARKETS
BUSINESS
INVESTING
TECH
POLITICS & POLICY
VIDEO
INVESTING CLUB
PRO
LIVESTREAM
Search quotes, news & videos
WATCHLIST
SIGN IN
CREATE FREE ACCOUNT
TECH
OpenAI’s ChatGPT will soon allow ‘erotica’ for adults in major policy shift
PUBLISHED TUE, OCT 14 202511:38 PM EDTUPDATED WED, OCT 15 20251:24 AM EDT
Dylan Butts
@IN/DYLAN-B-7A451A107
SHARE
Share Article via Facebook
Share Article via Twitter
Share Article via LinkedIn
Share Article via Email
KEY POINTS
It remains unclear exactly what material might fall under this permitted erotica.
The move could represent a major shift in OpenAI’s policy, which currently bans NSFW content.
“Now that we have been able to mitigate the serious mental health issues and have new tools, we are going to be able to safely relax the restrictions in most cases,” Altman said.
Sam Altman, chief executive officer of OpenAI Inc., during a media tour of the Stargate AI data center in Abilene, Texas, US, on Tuesday, Sept. 23, 2025.
Kyle Grillot | Bloomberg | Getty Images
Adult ChatGPT users can soon access a less censored version of the artificial intelligence chatbot, which will include erotic materials, OpenAI CEO Sam Altman has announced in an apparent policy shift.
“In December, as we roll out age-gating more fully and as part of our ‘treat adult users like adults’ principle, we will allow even more, like erotica for verified adults,” Altman said in a social media post on Tuesday.
Though it remains unclear what material will qualify as permitted erotica, the move could represent a major shift in OpenAI’s policy, which formerly prohibited such content in most contexts.
According to Altman, existing versions of ChatGPT were made “pretty restrictive” to protect users from mental health risks, but that approach made the chatbot “less useful [and enjoyable to many users who had no mental health problems.
“Now that we have been able to mitigate the serious mental health issues and have new tools, we are going to be able to safely relax the restrictions in most cases,” he said.
Those “new tools” appear to refer to safety features and parental controls rolled out last month to address concerns over how the chatbot was impacting young users’ mental health.
WATCH NOW
VIDEO03:11
Sam Altman delivers OpenAI developer day keynote: Here are the key points
However, as safeguards for minors expand, it appears that Altman is ready for ChatGPT to take a looser approach for adults.
OpenAI hinted at a shift in February when language on its “Model Spec” page was updated to clarify that, in order to “maximize freedom” for users, only sexual content involving minors was prohibited. Still, erotica was considered to be “sensitive content” to be generated only in certain permitted contexts.
Besides the rollout in December, Altman also said a new version of ChatGPT will launch in the coming weeks, allowing the chatbot to adopt more distinct personalities — building on updates in the latest GPT‑4o version.
“If you want your ChatGPT to respond in a very human-like way, or use a ton of emoji, or act like a friend, ChatGPT should do it,” he said. “But only if you want it.″
Growth vs. safety
After Altman’s post on Tuesday, some social media users were quick to point out his previous statements suggesting that ChatGPT wouldn’t implement sexualized chat features, unlike rival models such as xAI’s Grok.
In an August interview, independent tech journalist Cleo Abram asked Altman to give an example of a decision he had made that was best for the world, but not for winning the AI race.
“Well, we haven’t put a sex bot avatar in ChatGPT yet,” Altman said in an apparent nod to provocative AI companions released by Elon Musk’s xAI.
Altman’s policy shift comes at a notable time for OpenAI, as it already faces increased scrutiny over its safety practices. In September, the Federal Trade Commission launched an inquiry into several tech companies, including OpenAI, over potential risks to children and teenagers.
That followed a lawsuit from a California couple who alleged that ChatGPT contributed to their 16-year-old son’s suicide.
OpenAI on Tuesday also announced an eight-member expert council on well-being and AI to advise the company on how artificial intelligence affects users’ mental health, emotions and motivation.
The council will guide OpenAI in defining what healthy AI interactions look like through check-ins and recurring meetings, the company said.
Choose CNBC as your preferred source on Google and never miss a moment from the most trusted name in business news.
WATCH LIVESTREAM
Prefer to Listen?
NOW
Mad Money
UP NEXT
Shark Tank
TRENDING NOW
Trump tries to rename AI ‘super intelligence’ as polls show him sinking on key issue
Trump Accounts will auto-enroll children, potentially adding 60 million accounts: Treasury
Trump says he and tech leaders signed AI agreement that is ‘morally binding’
Education Department extends deadline for student loan interest rate discount
The Fed’s main inflation measure will be released Wednesday. Here’s what to expect
Sponsored Links
FROM THE WEB
MDs Say Mental Decline Begins When Seniors Can't Pronounce These 3 Phrases. Can You?
Memory Health Journal
Arizona: Worst Car Zip Codes for Overcharging Insurance (Is Yours On The List?)
OTTO Insurance
Click Here
Subscribe to CNBC PRO
Subscribe to Investing Club
Licensing & Reprints
CNBC Councils
Select Personal Finance
Join the CNBC Panel
Closed Captioning
Digital Products
News Releases
Internships
Corrections
About CNBC
Site Map
Podcasts
Careers
Help
Contact
News Tips
Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.
GET IN TOUCH
CNBC Newsletters
Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inbox
SIGN UP NOW
Get this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services.
Advertise With Us
PLEASE CONTACT US
Ad Choices
Privacy Policy
Your Privacy Choices
CA Notice
Terms of Service
© 2026 Versant Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Versant Media Company.
Data is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.
Market Data Terms of Use and Disclaimers
Data also provided by
This site is now part of Versant. By continuing, you agree to our Terms. You also acknowledge that our updated Privacy Policy applies, including your existing data. For info on your data rights, click “Your Privacy Choices” or see “Your Rights” in our Privacy Policy.
We and our partners also use tools on this site to provide the services, personalize your experience, and for analytics, marketing, and advertising. If you previously opted out of selling, sharing, or targeted advertising on this site, you will need to update your Privacy Choice.
Your Privacy Choices Continue