SKIP NAVIGATION
MARKETS
BUSINESS
INVESTING
TECH
POLITICS & POLICY
VIDEO
INVESTING CLUB
PRO
LIVESTREAM
Search quotes, news & videos
WATCHLIST
SIGN IN
CREATE FREE ACCOUNT
TECH
Scarlett Johansson says OpenAI ripped off her voice after she told the company not to use it in software
PUBLISHED MON, MAY 20 20247:12 PM EDTUPDATED TUE, MAY 21 20246:33 PM EDT
Jennifer Elias
@IN/JENNIFER-ELIAS-845B1130/
SHARE
Share Article via Facebook
Share Article via Twitter
Share Article via LinkedIn
Share Article via Email
KEY POINTS
Actor Scarlett Johansson says OpenAI ripped off her voice for the new ChatGPT AI voice named “Sky.”
“I was shocked, angered and in disbelief that Mr. Altman would pursue a voice that sounded so eerily similar to mine that my closest friends and news outlets could not tell the difference,” Johansson’s statement said.
Johansson said CEO Sam Altman approached her last September and then again two days before it launched ChatGPT4.O last week.
Altman has refuted the charges: “The voice of Sky is not Scarlett Johansson’s, and it was never intended to resemble hers.”
ROME, ITALY - NOVEMBER 10: Actor Scarlett Johansson attends ‘Her’ Premiere during The 8th Rome Film Festival at Auditorium Parco Della Musica on November 10, 2013 in Rome, Italy. (Photo by Vittorio Zunino Celotto/Getty Images)
Vittorio Zunino Celotto | Getty Images Entertainment | Getty Images
Actor Scarlett Johansson says OpenAI CEO Sam Altman used a voice similar to hers for its artificial intelligence voice software despite declining his invitation for its use.
The response comes after OpenAI said it would pull its ChatGPT AI voice dubbed “Sky”, which launched last week amid controversy over it sounding like Johansson’s voice in the movie “Her.”
Johansson said Altman approached her last September and then again two days before it announced ChatGPT-4o on May 13. The actor played the voice character in the film “Her” about a man who forms a relationship with an AI virtual assistant named Samantha.
“After much consideration and for personal reasons, I declined the offer,” Johansson said in a statement to CNBC. “Nine months later, my friends, family and the general public all noted how much the newest system named ‘Sky’ sounded like me.”
Altman, who had tweeted the cryptic message “her” on the day OpenAI announced its new AI, has refuted the charges.
“The voice of Sky is not Scarlett Johansson’s, and it was never intended to resemble hers. We cast the voice actor behind Sky’s voice before any outreach to Ms. Johansson,” Altman said. “Out of respect for Ms. Johansson, we have paused using Sky’s voice in our products. We are sorry to Ms. Johansson that we didn’t communicate better.”
The actor wrote Monday that she has hired legal counsel.
“When I heard the released demo, I was shocked, angered and in disbelief that Mr. Altman would pursue a voice that sounded so eerily similar to mine that my closest friends and news outlets could not tell the difference,” Johansson said. “Mr. Altman even insinuated that the similarity was intentional, tweeting a single word ‘her.’”
Johansson has sparred with large companies like Disney in the past. In 2021, Johansson and Walt Disney settled the breach of contract lawsuit the “Black Widow” actor brought against the studio.
“We’ve heard questions about how we chose the voices in ChatGPT, especially Sky,” Microsoft-backed OpenAI posted on X on Monday.
“Sky’s voice is not an imitation of Scarlett Johansson but belongs to a different professional actress using her own natural speaking voice,” the company wrote in a blog post on Sunday. “To protect their privacy, we cannot share the names of our voice talents.”
Johansson said she wrote two letters to Altman and OpenAI, asking them to detail the process of creating Sky.
“In a time when we are all grappling with deepfakes and the protection of our own likeness, our own work, our own identities, I believe these are questions that deserve absolute clarity,” her statement says. “I look forward to resolution in the form of transparency and the passage of appropriate legislation to help ensure that individual rights are protected.”
OpenAI didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment on the actor’s statement.
Here is Scarlett Johansson’s full statement:
“Last September, I received an offer from Sam Altman, who wanted to hire me to voice the current ChatGPT 4.0 system. He told me that he felt that by my voicing the system, I could bridge the gap between tech companies and creatives and help consumers to feel comfortable with the seismic shift concerning humans and AI. He said he felt that my voice would be comforting to people.
After much consideration and for personal reasons, I declined the offer. Nine months later, my friends, family and the general public all noted how much the newest system named “Sky” sounded like me.
When I heard the released demo, I was shocked, angered and in disbelief that Mr. Altman would pursue a voice that sounded so eerily similar to mine that my closest friends and news outlets could not tell the difference. Mr. Altman even insinuated that the similarity was intentional, tweeting a single word “her” - a reference to the film in which I voiced a chat system, Samantha, who forms an intimate relationship with a human.
Two days before the ChatGPT 4.0 demo was released, Mr. Altman contacted my agent, asking me to reconsider. Before we could connect, the system was out there
As a result of their actions, I was forced to hire legal counsel, who wrote two letters to Mr. Altman and OpenAI, setting out what they had done and asking them to detail the exact process by which they created the “Sky” voice. Consequently, OpenAI reluctantly agreed to take down the “Sky” voice.
In a time when we are all grappling with deepfakes and the protection of our own likeness, our own work, our own identities, I believe these are questions that deserve absolute clarity. I look forward to resolution in the form of transparency and the passage of appropriate legislation to help ensure that individual rights are protected.”
Don’t miss these insights from CNBC PRO
Trump’s $100,000 visa plan could hit these companies the hardest
Goldman Sachs raises S&P 500 target for year-end
China isn’t begging for Nvidia anymore. Here are homegrown tech plays to watch
Bitcoin could soon have a big global buyer that has shunned it up to this point
Choose CNBC as your preferred source on Google and never miss a moment from the most trusted name in business news.
WATCH LIVESTREAM
Prefer to Listen?
NOW
Fast Money
UP NEXT
Mad Money
TRENDING NOW
Trump says he and tech leaders signed AI agreement that is ‘morally binding’
Trump Accounts will auto-enroll children, potentially adding 60 million accounts: Treasury
Education Department extends deadline for student loan interest rate discount
The Fed’s main inflation measure will be released Wednesday. Here’s what to expect
Trump tries to rename AI ‘super intelligence’ as polls show him sinking on key issue
Subscribe to CNBC PRO
Subscribe to Investing Club
Licensing & Reprints
CNBC Councils
Select Personal Finance
Join the CNBC Panel
Closed Captioning
Digital Products
News Releases
Internships
Corrections
About CNBC
Site Map
Podcasts
Careers
Help
Contact
News Tips
Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.
GET IN TOUCH
CNBC Newsletters
Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inbox
SIGN UP NOW
Get this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services.
Advertise With Us
PLEASE CONTACT US
Ad Choices
Privacy Policy
Your Privacy Choices
CA Notice
Terms of Service
© 2026 Versant Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Versant Media Company.
Data is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.
Market Data Terms of Use and Disclaimers
Data also provided by
This site is now part of Versant. By continuing, you agree to our Terms. You also acknowledge that our updated Privacy Policy applies, including your existing data. For info on your data rights, click “Your Privacy Choices” or see “Your Rights” in our Privacy Policy.
We and our partners also use tools on this site to provide the services, personalize your experience, and for analytics, marketing, and advertising. If you previously opted out of selling, sharing, or targeted advertising on this site, you will need to update your Privacy Choice.
Your Privacy Choices Continue