OpenAI is removing limits on text-based chats for all users on ChatGPT, which recently crossed the 1 billion weekly user mark, the company announced today.
The new GPT-5.6 Luna model will power this experience and will be the default model for Free and Go users, replacing GPT-5.5.
Both users will also get a new “Think” button that lets them select higher reasoning power for complex questions. OpenAI said that there will still be separate limits for files, images, voice, and image generation.
IMAGE CREDITS:OPENAI
The update brings changes for Plus and Pro users as well. They’ll gain access to an upgraded GPT-5.6 Sol model that’s better for quick tasks such as questions, web research, advice, planning, writing, and making decisions. The company noted that this new model will give more compact and robust answers. (Notably, this is a separate version from GPT-5.6 Sol used for Codex and Work, which is unchanged.)
ChatGPT Plus and Pro users are also getting a thinking slider to adjust “how much” thought the model puts into an answer. They can tune the thinking slider based on complexity and steps involved in solving a query.
IMAGE CREDITS:OPENAI
OpenAI said an internal evaluation found that, compared to GPT-5.5-Instant, factual errors were 62% less common for GPT-5.6 Luna and 68% less common for GPT-5.6 Sol.
The updated version of GPT-5.6 Sol is available to Plus and Pro users today, while the other changes for Free and Go users are arriving this week. Next week, users will gain access to unlimited text chats and the new Think button for harder questions.
Topics
AI
Apps
ChatGPT
OpenAI
When you purchase through links in our articles, we may earn a small commission. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.
Ivan Mehta
Ivan covers global consumer tech developments at TechCrunch. He is based out of India and has previously worked at publications including Huffington Post and The Next Web.
You can contact or verify outreach from Ivan by emailing im@ivanmehta.com or via encrypted message at ivan.42 on Signal.
View Bio
October 13 – 15
San Francisco
Get 50% off a second pass
The Disrupt experience is meant to be shared. Get your pass and bring a colleague, partner, or peer at 50% off. Cover more ground by making connections, building momentum, and discovering what’s next in the startup ecosystem.
BOOK NOW
Most Popular
Google thinks SpaceX’s Starship has to launch 1,800 times before space data centers get off the ground
World’s first enhanced geothermal power plant completed in just 23 months
Google releases Gemini 4 Argon, called its most powerful model yet
The Pentagon taps Elon Musk and Palmer Luckey to help decide what the military should do next
OpenAI launches Dots, its bubbly agentic avatar
AMD will acquire Fei-Fei Li’s World Labs for $8.2B
Viral AI agent Instinct raises $1B Series C at a $10B valuation