Maxwell Zeff
Business
Apr 14, 2026 11:21 AM
Anthropic Opposes the Extreme AI Liability Bill That OpenAI Backed
Anthropic and OpenAI are clashing over a proposed Illinois law that would let AI labs largely off the hook for mass deaths and financial disasters.
Photo-Illustration: Darrell Jackson; Getty Images
Save this story
Save this story
Anthropic has come out against a proposed Illinois law backed by OpenAI that would shield AI labs from liability if their systems are used to cause large-scale harm, like mass casualties or more than $1 billion in property damage.
The fight over the bill, SB 3444, is drawing new battle lines between Anthropic and OpenAI over how AI technologies should be regulated . While AI policy experts say that the legislation has only a remote chance of becoming law, it has nonetheless exposed political divisions between two leading US AI labs that could become increasingly important as the rival companies ramp up their lobbying activity across the country.
Behind the scenes, Anthropic has been lobbying state senator Bill Cunningham, SB 3444’s sponsor, and other Illinois lawmakers to either make major changes to the bill or kill it as it stands, according to people familiar with the matter. In an email to WIRED, an Anthropic spokesperson confirmed the company’s opposition to SB 3444 and said it has held promising conversations with Cunningham about using the bill as a starting point for future AI legislation.
“We are opposed to this bill. Good transparency legislation needs to ensure public safety and accountability for the companies developing this powerful technology, not provide a get-out-of-jail-free card against all liability,” Cesar Fernandez, Anthropic’s head of US state and local government relations, said in a statement. “We know that Senator Cunningham cares deeply about AI safety, and we look forward to working with him on changes that would instead pair transparency with real accountability for mitigating the most serious harms frontier AI systems could cause."
Representatives for Cunningham did not respond to a request for comment. A spokesperson for Illinois governor JB Pritzker sent the following statement: “While the Governor’s Office will monitor and review the many AI bills moving through the General Assembly, governor Pritzker does not believe big tech companies should ever be given a full shield that evades responsibilities they should have to protect the public interest.”
The crux of OpenAI and Anthropic’s disagreement over SB 3444 comes down to who should be liable in the event of an AI-enabled disaster—a nightmare potential scenario that US lawmakers have only recently begun to confront. If SB 3444 were passed, an AI lab would not be responsible if a bad actor used its AI model to, for example, create a bioweapon that kills hundreds of people, so long as the lab drafted its own safety framework and published it on its website.
OpenAI has argued that SB 3444 reduces the risk of serious harm from frontier AI systems while “still allowing this technology to get into the hands of the people and businesses—small and big—of Illinois.”
The ChatGPT maker says it has worked with states like New York and California to create what it calls a “harmonized” approach to regulating AI. “In the absence of federal action, we will continue to work with states—including Illinois—to work toward a consistent safety framework,” OpenAI spokesperson Liz Bourgeois said in a statement. “We hope these state laws will inform a national framework that will help ensure the US continues to lead.”
Anthropic, on the other hand, is arguing that companies developing frontier AI models should be held at least partially responsible if their technology is used for widespread societal harm.
Some experts say the bill would dismantle existing regulations meant to deter companies from behaving badly. "Liability already exists under common law and provides a powerful incentive for AI companies to take reasonable steps to prevent foreseeable risks from their AI systems,” says Thomas Woodside, cofounder and senior policy adviser at the Secure AI Project, a nonprofit that has helped develop and advocate for AI safety laws in California and New York. “SB 3444 would take the extreme step of nearly eliminating liability for severe harms. But it's a bad idea to weaken liability, which in most states is the most significant form of legal accountability for AI companies that's already in place."
Anthropic testified last week in favor of another Illinois state bill, SB 3261, which would be one of the nation’s strongest AI safety laws if it were to pass. That legislation requires frontier AI developers like OpenAI and Anthropic to create public safety and child protection plans and get them tested by third-party auditors to assess their effectiveness.
Anthropic, which was founded five years ago by a group of OpenAI defectors, has developed a reputation for speaking loudly about potential risks stemming from advanced artificial intelligence and advocating for safeguards to prevent them. That approach has repeatedly landed the company in the crosshairs of the Trump administration, which has tried to curb state-level AI regulations that it argues could hamper development. David Sacks, then the Trump administration’s AI and crypto czar, complained in a social media post last year that Anthropic was running a “sophisticated regulatory capture strategy based on fear-mongering.”
Update 4/14/26 11:35 am EDT: This story has been updated to include a statement from Illinois governor JB Pritzker's office.
Comments
Back to top
Join the discussion
Comments
Back to top
You Might Also Like
• Introducing the app: More ways to make the most of WIRED
• Why so many AI researchers think the technology could kill us all
• The Big Interview: Patti Harrison had dreams of a tech utopia
• I let an AI agent hack all my gadgets —and I’d do it again
• In your inbox: Go inside the world of digital security with Kernel Panic
Maxwell Zeff is a senior writer at WIRED covering the business of artificial intelligence. He was previously a senior reporter with TechCrunch, where he broke news on startups and leaders driving the AI boom. Before that, Zeff covered AI policy and content moderation for Gizmodo and wrote some of Bloomberg’s ... Read More
Senior Writer
Topics artificial intelligence Regulation Anthropic OpenAI laws
Read More
Top Uber Eats Promo Codes for October 2026
Hunger meets savings. Discover verified Uber Eats promo codes, new user offers, and Uber One discounts to slash your delivery fees and meal costs.
Molly Higgins
Top AT&T Promo Codes: $50 Off This October 2026
Whether you’re looking to upgrade your internet or get the latest phone, we’ve got you covered with our selection of AT&T coupons and deals.
Kat Merck
Starz Promo Codes & Deals for 2026
Ready to stream award-winning series, hit movies, and exclusive originals? Our comprehensive guide helps you find every active Starz coupon, free trial, and discount code to save big on your subscription this 2026.
Molly Higgins
Limited Time: TurboTax Coupons Full Service This October 2026
Tax season doesn’t have to be stressful. Score 10% off full service expert on federal tax filings and more exclusive TurboTax discount codes on WIRED.
Molly Higgins
Top Sephora Promo Codes: 20% Off for October 2026
Earn more points on skincare purchases when you use our Sephora coupon.
Louryn Strampe
Top Mattress Firm Coupons: Save up to $700
Use a Mattress Firm promo code to save on top mattresses, score a free adjustable base, and unlock up to $300 in instant credits.
Nena Farrell
Squarespace Promo Codes: 20% Off in October 2026
Get 20% off your next website, 10% off with exclusive Squarespace discount code, 50% off plans, and more top coupons from WIRED.
Molly Higgins
Maytag Promo Codes: 15% Off
Upgrade your home for less with these verified Maytag discount codes, military savings, and limited-time closeout offers on washers, dryers, and more.
Matthew Korfhage
Top Peacock Promo Codes: 40% Off October 2026
Stream your favorite shows for up to $80 off this month, and save on subscription plans with the latest Peacock TV coupons from WIRED.
Molly Higgins
Nomad Goods Promo Codes: Get 25% Off in October 2026
Save up to 25% on Nomad Goods accessories such as Nomad phone cases, Nomad wallets, and more in October 2026.
Molly Higgins
eBay Coupons in October 2026
Save up to 60% on a selection of items at eBay, including electronics, home products, card games, car parts and more.
Molly Higgins
Top Hotels.com Coupon Codes for October 2026
Unlock significant savings on hotels, resorts, and getaways with our verified Hotels.com promo codes and gift card discounts. Plan your perfect trip today!
Molly Higgins