Upgrade to Premium
Log In
Home
Microsoft
Google
Apple
Little Tech
AI + Cloud
Smart Home
Games
Podcasts
Paul
Premium⭐
Forums
Blog
A.I.
OpenAI
Post
OpenAI is No Longer Working on ‘Adult Mode’ for ChatGPT
Laurent Giret
MAR 26, 2026
3
OpenAI has “indefinitely” paused its work on an ‘adult’ mode for ChatGPT, the Financial Times is reporting today. OpenAI CEO Sam Altman said in October that he wanted the chatbot to “treat adult users like adults” and allow erotica for verified adults. Still, these plans have proven to be controversial within the AI startup.
According to the Financial Times, “the sexual chatbot faced growing pushback over how it could encourage unhealthy attachments to AI systems and expose minors to problematic sexual content.” In recent months, we’ve also seen how AI chatbots can go off the rails when xAI’s Grok chatbot was used to “nudify” pictures of real people, including children.
Video Muted
Obviously, OpenAI doesn’t need that kind of controversy right now. The Financial Times also reported that this adult mode made some investors, probably for good reason. The AI startup told the FT that it was waiting to have long-term research on the effects of sexually explicit chats and emotional attachments before going forward with its sexual chatbot.
Overall, OpenAI seems to be going through an intense refocus. The company just killed its Sora video generation model and mobile apps, which also led Disney to cancel its $1 billion investment into the startup. The Wall Street Journal previously reported that OpenAI’s current priority is the development of a ‘superapp’ that combines ChatGPT, its Codex coding agent, and its Atlas web browser.
Tagged with
ChatGPT
OpenAI
Share post
Community Guidelines
We maintain the community forums so our readers have access to rich conversations and can discuss their thoughts and opinions on technology topics of interest.
By participating in the conversations on this website, you agree to follow the rules to create a civil place for discussion.
Read Full Guidelines
Post a comment
Fields marked with * are required
Name
*
Email
*
Website
Comment
*
Leave this field empty
Post Comment
About author
Laurent Giret
Laurent is a Senior News Editor helping Paul Thurrott with daily tech news coverage since 2022. He's been writing about the technology industry for 10 years, mainly focusing on Big Tech companies. He also was the Editorial Manager of the Petri IT Knowledgebase from 2022 to 2023. You can follow Laurent on LinkedIn, Threads, X (Twitter), Bluesky, and Mastodon.
View Articles
Currently on Forums
Visit the forums
Is AI profitable?
Posted by anderb
0
comment
Windows 11 version 27H2: Microsoft’s next major platform upgrade for the masses in 2027?
Posted by shameer_mulji
4
comments
Unable to use Firefox to access Thurrott.com
Posted by lwetzel
5
comments
FTC to investigate AI companies
Posted by lvthunder
0
comment
Podcasts
Podcast Hub
First Ring Daily 2032: Tots and Dots
Aired on September 30, 2026 by Brad Sams with 0 Comments
First Ring Daily 2031: A Theory
Aired on September 29, 2026 by Brad Sams with 0 Comments
First Ring Daily 2030: A Future Game
Aired on September 28, 2026 by Brad Sams with 0 Comments
First Ring Daily 2029: Super Pilot
Aired on September 25, 2026 by Brad Sams with 1 Comment
Join the crowd where the love of tech is real - become a Thurrott Premium Member today!
Explore Premium Benefits
© 2026 Thurrott LLC
Become a Thurrott member
Contact help and support
Contact Paul
Advertising
RSS
Terms of Content Use
A RAPTIVE PARTNER SITE