SKIP NAVIGATION
MARKETS
BUSINESS
INVESTING
TECH
POLITICS & POLICY
VIDEO
INVESTING CLUB
PRO
LIVESTREAM
Search quotes, news & videos
WATCHLIST
SIGN IN
CREATE FREE ACCOUNT
TECH
Anthropic takes aim at OpenAI’s ad push in Super Bowl commercial
PUBLISHED WED, FEB 4 20269:44 AM ESTUPDATED WED, FEB 4 20262:26 PM EST
Ashley Capoot
@/IN/ASHLEY-CAPOOT/
SHARE
Share Article via Facebook
Share Article via Twitter
Share Article via LinkedIn
Share Article via Email
KEY POINTS
Anthropic said its artificial intelligence chatbot Claude will remain ad-free.
The startup’s rival OpenAI recently announced plans to begin testing advertisements within ChatGPT.
Anthropic said the personal nature of users’ conversations with Claude would make ads feel “incongruous.”
Dario Amodei, co-founder and CEO of Anthropic, during a Bloomberg Television interview in San Francisco, Dec. 9, 2025.
David Paul Morris | Bloomberg | Getty Images
Anthropic is spending millions of dollars on Super Bowl commercials slamming rival OpenAI’s recent decision to start showing ads within its ChatGPT chatbot.
The artificial intelligence startup on Wednesday said its chatbot Claude will remain ad-free. Users will not see ads or sponsored links near their conversations, and the chatbot’s answers will not be influenced by third-party product placements.
The personal nature of users’ conversations with Claude would make ads feel “incongruous” and “in many cases, inappropriate,” the company said.
Anthropic unveiled its first Super Bowl campaign on Wednesday, which centers around the company’s decision to keep Claude ad-free. Anthropic will air a 60-second pregame ad and a 30-second in-game ad that both feature the tag line, “Ads are coming to AI. But not to Claude.”
A 30-second slot during this year’s game has sold for an average of $8 million, though between five and 10 ads sold for more than $10 million apiece, according to Mark Marshall, NBC’s chairman of global advertising and partnerships.
Read more CNBC tech news
Zuckerberg, Amodei among tech executives set to meet Trump Tuesday
OpenAI sparked Hugging Face bids with early investment offer ahead of Nvidia’s $13 billion deal
Nvidia releases software platform to stop AI agents from misbehaving
SpaceX launches its massive Starship rocket into orbit for the first time
Anthropic was founded in 2021 by former OpenAI researchers, including its CEO, Dario Amodei. The company is best known for developing a family of AI models called Claude, and its AI coding tool Claude Code has exploded in popularity in recent months.
“Our business model is straightforward: we generate revenue through enterprise contracts and paid subscriptions, and we reinvest that revenue into improving Claude for our users,” Anthropic said in the blog post. “This is a choice with tradeoffs, and we respect that other AI companies might reasonably reach different conclusions.”
Last month, OpenAI said it would start to test ads with its free users and ChatGPT Go subscribers in the U.S. The company said the ads will be clearly labeled, appear at the bottom of the chatbot’s answers and will not influence ChatGPT’s responses.
OpenAI inked more than $1.4 trillion worth of infrastructure deals in 2025, so introducing ads to ChatGPT could help the company meet those ambitious spending commitments. Digital advertising has long been the primary revenue driver for other big tech companies like Google and Meta.
By forgoing ads within Claude, Anthropic could miss out on a lucrative revenue stream, but the company is not being shy about its decision.
WATCH: Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei on AI race: Focused on making our models as smart and capable as possible
WATCH NOW
VIDEO06:36
Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei on AI race: Focused on making our models as smart and capable as possible
Choose CNBC as your preferred source on Google and never miss a moment from the most trusted name in business news.
WATCH LIVESTREAM
Prefer to Listen?
NOW
Fast Money
UP NEXT
Mad Money
TRENDING NOW
Trump says he and tech leaders signed AI agreement that is ‘morally binding’
Trump Accounts will auto-enroll children, potentially adding 60 million accounts: Treasury
Education Department extends deadline for student loan interest rate discount
The Fed’s main inflation measure will be released Wednesday. Here’s what to expect
30-year Treasury bond yield scales to highest level since 2002
Subscribe to CNBC PRO
Subscribe to Investing Club
Licensing & Reprints
CNBC Councils
Select Personal Finance
Join the CNBC Panel
Closed Captioning
Digital Products
News Releases
Internships
Corrections
About CNBC
Site Map
Podcasts
Careers
Help
Contact
News Tips
Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.
GET IN TOUCH
CNBC Newsletters
Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inbox
SIGN UP NOW
Get this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services.
Advertise With Us
PLEASE CONTACT US
Ad Choices
Privacy Policy
Your Privacy Choices
CA Notice
Terms of Service
© 2026 Versant Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Versant Media Company.
Data is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.
Market Data Terms of Use and Disclaimers
Data also provided by
This site is now part of Versant. By continuing, you agree to our Terms. You also acknowledge that our updated Privacy Policy applies, including your existing data. For info on your data rights, click “Your Privacy Choices” or see “Your Rights” in our Privacy Policy.
We and our partners also use tools on this site to provide the services, personalize your experience, and for analytics, marketing, and advertising. If you previously opted out of selling, sharing, or targeted advertising on this site, you will need to update your Privacy Choice.
Your Privacy Choices Continue