OpenAI has decided that its nonprofit division will retain control over its for-profit organization, after the company initially announced that it planned to convert to a for-profit organization.
According to the company, OpenAI’s business wing, which has been under the nonprofit since 2019, will transition to a public benefit corporation (PBC). The nonprofit will control and also be a large shareholder of the PBC.
“OpenAI was founded as a nonprofit, and is today overseen and controlled by that nonprofit,” OpenAI Board Chairman Bret Taylor wrote in a statement on the company’s blog. “Going forward, it will continue to be overseen and controlled by that nonprofit.”
OpenAI says that it made the decision “after hearing from civic leaders and engaging in constructive dialogue with the offices of the Attorney General of Delaware and the Attorney General of California.”
“We thank both offices and we look forward to continuing these important conversations to make sure OpenAI can continue to effectively pursue its mission,” Taylor said.
OpenAI was founded as a nonprofit in 2015, but it converted to a “ capped-profit ” in 2019 and was trying to restructure once more into a for-profit. When it transitioned to a capped-profit, OpenAI retained its nonprofit wing, which currently has a controlling stake in the organization’s corporate arm.
OpenAI had said that its conversion, which it argued was necessary to raise the capital needed to grow and expand its operations, would preserve its nonprofit status and infuse it with additional resources to be spent on “charitable initiatives” in sectors such as healthcare, education, and science. In exchange for its controlling stake in OpenAI’s enterprise, the nonprofit would reportedly stand to reap billions of dollars .
Many disagreed with the proposal, including early OpenAI investor Elon Musk, who filed a lawsuit against OpenAI opposing the company’s planned transition. Musk’s complaint accuses the startup of abandoning its nonprofit mission, which aimed to ensure its AI research benefits all of humanity.
Musk had sought a preliminary injunction to halt OpenAI’s conversion . A federal judge denied the request but permitted the case to go to a jury trial in spring 2026.
A group of ex-OpenAI employees and Encode, a nonprofit that co-sponsored California’s ill-fated SB 1047 AI safety legislation, filed amicus briefs several weeks ago in support of Musk’s lawsuit. Separately, a cohort of organizations, including nonprofits and labor groups like the California Teamsters, petitioned California Attorney General Rob Bonta to stop OpenAI from becoming a for-profit, claiming the company had “failed to protect its charitable assets.”
Several Nobel laureates, law professors, and civil society organizations had also sent letters to Bonta and Delaware’s attorney general, Kathy Jennings, requesting that they halt the startup’s restructuring efforts.
The stakes were high for OpenAI, which needed to complete its for-profit conversion by the end of this year or next or risk relinquishing some of the capital the company has raised in recent months, according to reports . It’s unclear what consequences may befall OpenAI now that it’s reversed course.
In a letter to staff on Monday also published o n OpenAI’s blog , CEO Sam Altman said he thinks OpenAI may eventually require “trillions of dollars” to fulfill its goal of “[making the company’s] services broadly available to all of humanity.”
“[OpenAI’s nonprofit] will become a big shareholder in the PBC in an amount supported by independent financial advisors,” wrote Altman. “[W]e are moving to a normal capital structure where everyone has stock. … We look forward to advancing the details of [our] plan in continued conversation with them, [our partner] Microsoft, and our newly appointed nonprofit commissioners.”
Topics
AI , OpenAI
When you purchase through links in our articles, we may earn a small commission . This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.
Kyle Wiggers
AI Editor
Kyle Wiggers was TechCrunch’s AI Editor until June 2025. His writing has appeared in VentureBeat and Digital Trends, as well as a range of gadget blogs including Android Police, Android Authority, Droid-Life, and XDA-Developers. He lives in Manhattan with his partner, a music therapist.
View Bio
October 13 – 15
San Francisco
Get 50% off a second pass
The Disrupt experience is meant to be shared. Get your pass and bring a colleague, partner, or peer at 50% off. Cover more ground by making connections, building momentum, and discovering what’s next in the startup ecosystem.
BOOK NOW
Most Popular
• class="wp-block-post post-3170030 post type-post status-publish format-standard has-post-thumbnail hentry category-artificial-intelligence category-transportation tag-boom-supersonic tag-crusoe">
Crusoe abandons $1.25B plan to use Boom turbines at AI data centers
• Kirsten Korosec
• class="wp-block-post post-3169728 post type-post status-publish format-standard has-post-thumbnail hentry category-artificial-intelligence tag-anthropic tag-astra tag-openai tag-opus">
Astra and Opus just passed Turing’s other test
• Tim Fernholz
• class="wp-block-post post-3169077 post type-post status-publish format-standard has-post-thumbnail hentry category-artificial-intelligence tag-stargate tag-data-centers tag-oracle">
Oracle sends force majeure notice on its New Mexico Stargate data center
• Aditya Mehta
• class="wp-block-post post-3168692 post type-post status-publish format-standard has-post-thumbnail hentry category-artificial-intelligence tag-mark-zuckerberg tag-meta tag-muse">
Meta made a Tamagotchi-like wearable for its Muse AI agent
• Lucas Ropek
• class="wp-block-post post-3168578 post type-post status-publish format-standard has-post-thumbnail hentry category-media-entertainment tag-vogue tag-fashion">
Vogue sent robots down the runway at Vogue World, and people were not impressed
• Dominic-Madori Davis
• class="wp-block-post post-3168463 post type-post status-publish format-standard has-post-thumbnail hentry category-artificial-intelligence category-biotech-health tag-anthropic">
Anthropic says its biology lab has already found something big
• Julie Bort
• class="wp-block-post post-3167710 post type-post status-publish format-standard has-post-thumbnail hentry category-robotics category-transportation category-startups tag-tires">
PitPro’s first tire-changing robot goes live in Canada
• Sean O'Kane