• March 27
Anthropic Thinks AI Might Destroy the Economy. It's Building It Anyway.
Plain English with Derek Thompson
1h 3m
Today’s podcast is an interview with one of the cofounders of the AI company Anthropic, Jack Clark. One thing I’m trying to do with the subject of artificial intelligence is offer a balance of perspectives on an issue that tends to receive mostly one-sided coverage. Some people are certain that AI is a bubble; some are certain it is not. Some are certain that AI will destroy millions of jobs; some are certain that it will not. I want listeners of this show to feel like every time they hear an intelligent take on one side of this issue, the next episode they’ll hear a countervailing take. Two weeks ago, you heard the investor and writer Paul Kedrosky argue that AI was an economic bubble.
But if any single data point pierces that narrative, it’s this. From December 2025 to this month, March 2026, Anthropic has more than doubled its annual recurring revenue, from $9 billion to nearly $20 billion. According to several analysts, there is no record of any company growing this fast at this scale.
Now, I don’t need Jack Clark or anybody at Anthropic to read me a corporate statement about the company’s revenue growth. I can read that myself. What I wanted to do today is ask questions that only someone in Jack’s position can answer.
If Anthropic’s executives believe that AI might be as dangerous as nuclear weapons, what right does any private business have to build this sort of thing for profit?
How does the company balance its reputation as the industry leader in caution and safety with its other reputation as one of the fastest developers of this technology?
And if artificial intelligence has the capacity to produce a country of geniuses in a data center—as Anthropic’s CEO insists—why do Americans overall say they disapprove of artificial intelligence more than just about every other institution and individual in the world?
Subscribe to our YouTube channel here: https://www.youtube.com/@PlainEnglishwithDerekThompson
If you have questions, observations, or ideas for future episodes, email us at PlainEnglish@Spotify.com.
Host: Derek Thompson
Guest: Jack Clark
Producer: Devon Baroldi
Learn more about your ad choices. Visit podcastchoices.com/adchoices
Hosts & Guests
•
Derek Thompson
Host
Information
• Show
Plain English with Derek Thompson
• Frequency
Updated Semiweekly
• Published
March 27, 2026 at 10:00 AM UTC
• Length
1h 3m
• Rating
Clean