•
Home
•
Press
•
Press Releases
Casar Responds to OpenAI, Anthropic, Demands Greater Transparency About Major Security Lapses
Image
September 2, 2026
Press Release
WASHINGTON – Today, Rep. Greg Casar (D-TX) responded to information from CEOs of OpenAI and Anthropic, demanding greater transparency about recent major security incidents at both companies.
On August 10, 2026, Casar led dozens of members of Congress demanding that both OpenAI and Anthropic release more information about recent security lapses. While both companies responded with some information, neither met the standard of transparency demanded in the initial request.
OpenAI’s response can be found here and Anthropic’s response can be found here .
In his response to OpenAI, Casar writes he is “deeply concerned about the limited scope” of the investigation into the Hugging Face hacking incident. He also writes: “Your response was insufficient. You have failed to release the logs like the letter asked. The response you did provide reveals significant security errors on the part of OpenAI and the third-party software it relied on, including improper sandboxing and flawed cybersecurity practices.” The full letter can be found here .
In his response to Anthropic, Casar wrote: “Your response was insufficient. You failed to release the logs like the letter asked. You failed to fully answer a majority of the questions posed in the letter. Most notably, your response did not address our question about how many times in the past year an internally deployed Anthropic model has taken action outside of its authorized container, whether any of those events were disclosed to any government body, affected party, or the public, and which internal Anthropic systems a compromised model could reach.” The full letter can be found here .
In both letters, Casar writes: “Your unwillingness to provide Members of Congress with the information we requested is deeply concerning and signals to us that your company is not treating these cybersecurity incidents with the seriousness required.”
He requests both companies respond by September 15th.
Casar’s initial letter to OpenAI can be found here and his initial letter to Anthropic can be found here .
###
Congressman Greg Casar represents Texas’s 35th Congressional District in the U.S. House of Representatives, which runs down I-35 from East Austin to Hays County to the West Side of San Antonio. A labor organizer and son of Mexican immigrants, Casar serves as the Chair of the Congressional Progressive Caucus for the 119th Congress. He also serves on the Committee on Education and Labor and the Committee on Oversight and Accountability.