In Brief
Posted:
11:56 AM PDT · October 19, 2025
Image Credits: Jakub Porzycki/NurPhoto / Getty Images
•
• Anthony Ha
OpenAI’s ‘embarrassing’ math
“Hoisted by their own GPTards.”
That’s how Meta’s chief AI scientist Yann LeCun described the blowback after OpenAI researchers did a victory lap over GPT-5’s supposed math breakthroughs.
Google DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis added , “This is embarrassing.”
The Decoder reports that in a since-deleted tweet, OpenAI VP Kevin Weil declared that “GPT-5 found solutions to 10 (!) previously unsolved Erdős problems and made progress on 11 others.” (“Erdős problems” are famous conjectures posed by mathematician Paul Erdős.)
However, mathematician Thomas Bloom, who maintains the Erdos Problems website , said Weil’s post was “a dramatic misrepresentation” — while these problems were indeed listed as “open” on Bloom’s website, he said that only means “I personally am unaware of a paper which solves it.”
In other words, it’s not accurate to claim GPT-5 was able to solve previously unsolved problems. Instead, Bloom wrote, “GPT-5 found references, which solved these problems, that I personally was unaware of.”
Sebastien Bubeck, an OpenAI researcher who’d also been touting GPT-5’s accomplishments, then acknowledged that “only solutions in the literature were found,” but he suggested this remains a real accomplishment: “I know how hard it is to search the literature.”
Topics
AI , Demis Hassabis , In Brief , Kevin Weil , OpenAI
October 13 – 15
San Francisco
Get 50% off a second pass
The Disrupt experience is meant to be shared. Get your pass and bring a colleague, partner, or peer at 50% off. Cover more ground by making connections, building momentum, and discovering what’s next in the startup ecosystem.
BOOK NOW
Newsletters
See More
Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news
TechCrunch Daily News
Every weekday and Sunday, you can get the best of TechCrunch’s coverage.
TechCrunch Mobility
TechCrunch Mobility is your destination for transportation news and insight.
Startups Weekly
Startups are the core of TechCrunch, so get our best coverage delivered weekly.
StrictlyVC
Provides movers and shakers with the info they need to start their day.
No newsletters selected.
Subscribe
By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice .
Related
•
AI
ChatGPT can now virtually try on clothes for you
• Sarah Perez
2 days ago
•
AI
OpenAI cuts ties with 3 safety researchers, WSJ reports
• Aditya Mehta
2 days ago
•
AI
Opus 5.5 loves to tell you ‘this matters’ (and other AI writing tells)
• Russell Brandom
2 days ago
Latest in AI
•
AI
Meta wants your next gadget to be Muse-infused
• Kirsten Korosec
12 hours ago
•
In Brief
Sean Parker is rebuilding Stability AI around music
• Connie Loizos
16 hours ago
•
TechCrunch Disrupt 2026
Affected by layoffs? Don’t miss this $75 deal for your TechCrunch Disrupt 2026 Expo+ Pass
• TechCrunch Events
18 hours ago