1960 Bryant Street
San Francisco, CA 94110

August 21, 2024
The Honorable Scott Wiener
California State Senate
1021O Street, Room 8620
Sacramento, CA 95814
Re: Senate Bill 1047 (Wiener) - Safe and Secure Innovation for Frontier Artificial Intelligence
Models Act - OPPOSE
Dear Senator Wiener,
OpenAI was founded in 2015 as a research laboratory with the goal of creating safe artificial general
intelligence for the benefit of all of humanity. We have since released a suite of AI-powered tools like
ChatGPT designed to make this technology accessible to everyday Americans from all walks of life.
The rapid advancements in AI hold great promise, and we’ve been clear about our support for federal
regulation that balances the benefits, addresses potential risks, and ensures that the U.S. maintains its
lead in AI development. We’re encouraged by, and support, efforts to develop a clear set of AI policies –
including the White House Executive Order on AI and proposals in Congress – to make AI safe and
accessible to more people.
We appreciate your leadership on this issue, including your staff’s engagement with us over the last
several months. SB 1047 has inspired thoughtful debate, and we support the intent behind some of its
provisions, including first and foremost its focus on ensuring that frontier AI systems are developed and
deployed safely.
However, the broad and significant implications of AI for U.S. competitiveness and national security
require that regulation of frontier models be shaped and implemented at the federal level. A
federally-driven set of AI policies, rather than a patchwork of state laws, will foster innovation and
position the U.S. to lead the development of global standards. As a result, we join other AI labs,
developers, experts and members of California’s Congressional delegation in respectfully opposing SB
1047 and welcome the opportunity to outline some of our key concerns.
National security matters should be regulated at the federal level
As currently written, SB 1047 includes provisions with significant national security implications. For
instance, the bill seeks to address critical harms – such as chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear
(CBRN) – through the creation of Safety and Security Protocols (SSPs), and confers enforcement and
compliance responsibilities to state agencies like the California Attorney General’s Office and through the
creation of a Board of Frontier Models within the Government Operations Agency.

CBRN risks have national security implications best managed by the federal government and agencies
with in-depth policy and technical expertise, including the White House Office of Science and
Technology Policy, the Department of Commerce (i.e., the National Institute of Standards and
Technology and the U.S. AI Safety Institute), the National Security Council and the various defense and
intelligence agencies. These agencies have the resources and knowledge to manage crises related to AI
risks and deal with potential international implications. If states attempt to compete with the federal
government for scarce talent and resources, it will dilute the already limited expertise across agencies,
leading to a less effective and more fragmented policy for guarding against national security risks and
critical harms.
SB 1047 comes at a time when the Biden administration has already signed onto several agreements
designed to coordinate international efforts on AI safety and governance, including the Bletchley
Declaration, the G7 Hiroshima Process, and the Seoul Declaration for Safe, Innovative and Inclusive
AI. Closer to home, last July the White House secured voluntary commitments around AI safety and
evaluations from leading AI labs, including OpenAI. Subsequently, the White House issued a
landmark Executive Order meant to spur AI innovation while ensuring the technology is developed
and implemented safely and securely.
Furthermore, a clear federal framework of AI regulations would help the U.S. maintain its competitive
advantage against countries like China and to advance democratic governance and values around the
world. In a recent Washington Post op-ed, OpenAI CEO Sam Altman suggested that the U.S. may want
to share AI technology with allies and the developing world to align with democratic values and maintain
its global leadership in innovation. Striking the right balance between open source and closed source
models involves complex trade-offs that intersect with issues like investment rules and export controls
which are best managed by federal authorities.
Maintaining the U.S. and California’s technological lead
As a San Francisco-based company, we share concerns about the bill’s potential impact on California’s
ability to help the U.S. maintain our current global technological lead. Many of the industry’s leading
developers, entrepreneurs and researchers live and work here, making California home to both AI’s
biggest players and a thriving ecosystem of start-ups and other smaller companies.
We share the concerns that Rep. Zoe Lofgren, the ranking member of the House Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, expressed in a recent letter1 to your office detailing her opposition
to the bill. As Rep. Lofgren noted, “High tech innovation is the economic engine that drives
California’s prosperity,” particularly in the Bay Area. If the bill is signed into law, she rightly pointed
out, there “is a real risk that companies will decide to incorporate in other jurisdictions or simply not
release models in California.”
Rep. Lofgren isn’t the only member of Congress who opposes the bill. Speaker Emerita Nancy Pelosi
and members of California’s Congressional delegation cautioned recently that SB 1047 poses significant
1

https://lofgren.house.gov/sites/evo-subsites/lofgren.house.gov/files/evo-media-document/8.7.24%20to%20Senator%
20Wiener.pdf

unintended consequences that could stifle innovation and harm the U.S. AI ecosystem. They even took
the rare step of encouraging Governor Newsom to veto the bill if it passed the State Assembly in its
current form.
The AI revolution is only just beginning, and California’s unique status as the global leader in AI is fueling
the state’s economic dynamism. SB 1047 would threaten that growth, slow the pace of innovation, and
lead California’s world-class engineers and entrepreneurs to leave the state in search of greater
opportunity elsewhere. Given those risks, we must protect America’s AI edge with a set of federal
policies – rather than state ones – that can provide clarity and certainty for AI labs and developers while
also preserving public safety.
Existing federal efforts to address AI risks and benefits
As we mentioned earlier in this letter, we support the bill’s goal of ensuring that frontier AI models are
developed and deployed safely, and are encouraged by the progress we’ve seen at the executive and
legislative branch to address AI’s potential risks and leverage its benefits.
Last year, we signed on to the Biden administration’s Executive Order (EO) on AI that included a series of
voluntary commitments aimed at promoting the development of safe, secure, and trustworthy artificial
intelligence. Those provisions of the EO reinforced our existing practices and provided a valuable
framework to standardize and formalize safety efforts across the industry and internationally. This
collective effort enhances the overall trustworthiness of AI systems and promotes a collaborative
environment for addressing the challenges and opportunities presented by AI.
In Congress, lawmakers have presented a series of bills to regulate frontier AI models. For example, we
recently endorsed the Future of AI Innovation Act (S. 4178) which provides Congressional backing for the
new U.S. AI Safety Institute (US AISI). We also announced our support for the CREATE AI Act, which
formalizes the creation of a new effort to democratize access to AI research resources, and the National
Science Foundation AI Education Act, which will strengthen the country’s AI workforce and teach the
next generation about AI tools.
The EO and bills in Congress share a common vision of maximizing AI’s economic and educational
benefits while minimizing its risks. We will continue to work with federal stakeholders and other industry
leaders to advance a clear set of AI policies.
Looking toward the future
While we believe the federal government should lead in regulating frontier AI models to account for
implications to national security and competitiveness, we recognize there is also a role for states to play.
States can develop targeted AI policies to address issues like potential bias in hiring, deepfakes, and
help build essential AI infrastructure, such as data centers and power plants, to drive economic growth
and job creation. OpenAI is ready to engage with state lawmakers in California and elsewhere in the
country who are working to craft this kind of AI-specific legislation and regulation.

We believe AI holds great promise and that the world is at the beginning of a technical transformation on
par with the creation of the telephone or the internet. Those technologies are primarily regulated by the
federal government, not at the state level, and AI needs to be regulated in the same way.
We must continue to work toward effective federal policies that help protect America’s national security
and that of our allies, secure democratic governance and values, and preserve both our nation’s and
California’s competitive edge.

Sincerely

Jason Kwon
Chief Strategy Officer
OpenAI
Cc:

The Honorable Gavin Newsom, Governor of California
Senate President pro Tempore Mike McGuire
Members of the California State Assembly

