Home
Advocacy
Artificial Intelligence
Bartz v. Anthropic Settlement: What Authors Need to Know
Bartz v. Anthropic Settlement: What Authors Need to Know
Share
on Twitter
(opens in a new tab)
on Facebook
(opens in a new tab)
on Linkedin
(opens in a new tab)
via email
Updated September 4, 2026
Important Information Regarding Anthropic Copyright Settlement Claim Notices
September 4, 2026: The settlement administrator sent out notices this week to all claimants summarizing each of their claims, who else filed a claim for each title, and what percentage of the award others claimed. Here’s what you should know.
Page Contents
Background
Next Steps for Authors
Payment Amount and Allocation
Default Splits
Questions on How to Complete the Claims Form
The “Works List”
Settlement Fund
Key Deadlines
Webinar Resources
FAQs
Background
Bartz v. Anthropic is one of the major copyright lawsuits brought by authors against an AI company for using books without permission to train large language models. It was filed by nonfiction authors Charles Graeber (The Good Nurse) and Kirk Wallace Johnson (The Feather Thief) and thriller author Andrea Bartz (We Were Never Here).
In June 2025, Judge William Alsup of the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California ruled on summary judgment that using books without permission to train AI was fair use if they were acquired legally, but he denied Anthropic’s request for summary judgment related to piracy—finding that the piracy was not fair use. Judge Alsup scheduled a trial to determine Anthropic’s potential liability for piracy for December 1, 2025.
In July, the court certified a class of all rightsholders of books Anthropic acquired from LibGen and PiLiMi, provided the books were registered with the U.S. Copyright Office in a timely manner and have ISBN or ASIN numbers. Judge Alsup certified the class only for piracy, not the act of AI training, and as such the fair use ruling on training applies only with respect to the three named plaintiffs, not the certified class authors and publishers. The proposed settlement agreement came after an arms-length mediation with a neutral third-party mediator. The settlement agreement was preliminarily approved by Judge Alsup on September 25, 2025.
Next Steps for Authors
The claims deadline was Monday, March 30. The final approval hearing is scheduled for Thursday, May 14, at 2 p.m. PT.
Payment Amount and Allocation
The $1.5 billion award will be split among the rightsholders—which includes both authors and publishers—of all of the books included in the class after administration fees, lawyers’ fees, and expenses are paid. Each title will be paid an equal amount.
The settlement agreement discloses that approximately 500,000 titles out of the 7 million copies of books that Anthropic reportedly downloaded from LibGen and PiLiMi meet the definition required to be part of the class after accounting for duplicates and non-eligible works. That means that rightsholders can expect at least $3,000 per title (less costs and fees), which will be shared among the rightsholders for that title (if there is more than one rightsholder). However, that amount could increase depending on factors, such as the number of Class Works for which a valid claim is submitted and the interest earned by the Settlement Fund.
If there is a current publisher(s) (which still possesses an exclusive license), the author(s) will split the $3000 with the publisher. Any co-authors will share the author portion and, if there are multiple publishers (e.g., different publishers have exclusive rights to different formats), they will share the publisher portion. Assume that the co-authors and co-publishers will share the portion equally unless their contracts provide otherwise. The standard default split between publishers and authors of noneducational texts is 50/50, as described below. Authors who are the sole rightsholder in a work—such as self-published authors and authors whose rights have reverted or where the contracts have otherwise terminated—will receive the full award amount.
Default Splits
The Claim Form provides for a default split for trade and university press contracts of 50/50 as between publishers and authors. This default is meant to reflect the contractual norms in the industry but allows those with different terms in their contracts to negotiate other splits with their publisher, based on contractual terms.
If the default is chosen by both the author and publisher, then it will be applied without having to present the underlying contract. The goal of the default option is to make the claims process speedy and efficient.
In cases where there is no default, such as for educational texts or if either the author or publisher elects in the claim form not to use the default, then the author should indicate what default they do think (have a good faith belief) is correct and why. If the publisher and author cannot agree on the split based on the contract, it will go to a special master who will adjudicate the split.
Primary Default: 50/50 Split
The primary default is a 50/50 division of the approximately $3,000-per-work award between the author side and the publisher side. This applies to all trade and university press titles, but not to educational texts, namely textbooks and professional books published by the educational publishers.
If there are multiple authors or publishers, the co-authors or co-publishers split their portion. (i.e., if the author share is $1,500 and there are two authors, each will receive $750).
Deviating from the Default
Any claimant may deviate from the default on the Claim Form by checking a box and indicating an alternative split that mirrors their contract (they may be asked for the contract or other basic supporting details).
Textbook/Educational Authors
Default splits are not provided for works published by educational publishers, since there are no standard splits for infringement proceeds in most of those contracts. Splits for those works will instead be determined by any applicable terms in the contracts with the claimants making a good-faith representation of the splits.
For more information on how to complete a claim for educational texts, visit the Textbook and Academic Authors Association.
Sole Owners
If the author is the sole owner (e.g., rights reverted, self-published, or work-for-hire) they should indicate this in the claim form and will be entitled to 100 percent of the approximately $3000 settlement award. There is a separate check box for those who are sole owners; be sure to check it.
Questions on How to Complete the Claims Form
The settlement website has an FAQ that answers many common questions. The Authors Guild also has an FAQ, which continues to be updated.
We will assist any member with questions about how to complete the forms. Requests for assistance can be made through the legal request form.
The “Works List”: What Books Are Included?
All books eligible for the settlement award should be listed in the Works List. The Works List is limited to those books that meet all of the conditions of the certified class of rightsowners of books that meet this definition:
“Book” refers to any work possessing an ISBN or ASIN that was registered with the United States Copyright Office within five years of the work’s publication, and which was registered with the United States Copyright Office before being downloaded by Anthropic, or within three months of publication.
In sum, the work must have been:
Registered within 3 months of its first publication (in any format) OR before the titles were downloaded (because the Copyright Act provides statutory (court-set) damages only if one of the two is true), AND
Registered within 5 years of first publication (because the Copyright Act provides a presumption of validity of all the facts in the registration certificate, such as author and owner, for works registered within 5 years).
In other words:
The work must have been registered within 3 months of publication, OR
It must have been registered within 5 years of publication and before the download date of August 10, 2022.
Why are Publishers Included Too?
Publishers are included in the class along with authors. In his class certification order, Judge Alsup included in the class “All beneficial or legal copyright owners of the exclusive right to reproduce copies of any book in the versions of LibGen or PiLiMi downloaded by Anthropic.”
Note that under copyright law, when the author grants the publisher an exclusive license to publish the book in exchange for percentage royalties, the publisher is deemed the legal owner of the publication rights granted to it, and the author is deemed the “beneficial” owner of that right. This is also true if the author assigns the entire copyright to the publisher such that the publisher is the full copyright owner, but the author is still entitled to royalties, license fees and other benefits from exploitation of the work. However, if the book has gone out of print and the rights have reverted to the author or the license terminates, the author becomes the legal owner again.
What If My Book Isn’t on the Works List?
If you don’t find your books on the Works list, they are not included in the settlement. The court ordered the list to be finalized by the parties by September 15 and is not allowing it to be kept open, so it is unlikely that works not already on the list will be added.
The reasons a book would not be included in Works List are:
Your book was not downloaded by Anthropic from LibGen or PiLiMi. Anthropic downloaded from LibGen in June 2021 and in July 2022 from PiLiMi (the books they did not already have from Libgen). If you found your books on LibGen through The Atlantic website, that just means it was on Libgen at the time the data was downloaded in 2025; it does not mean it was on LibGen in June of 2021 and even if it was, that it was downloaded by Anthropic;
Your book was not published with an ISBN or ASIN; or
Your book was not registered with the Copyright Office (1) within five years of publication and (2) either before Anthropic downloaded it or within three months of publication.
While mistakes in the class list are highly unlikely given the rigorous approach taken in its compilation, if none of the above conditions are true, you may write to the Settlement Administrator at the address listed on the Settlement website for further explanation.
Check Whether Your Book Was Registered with the Copyright Office
Start by searching the U.S. Copyright Office public catalog. But keep in mind these common reasons you might not find a registration even if one exists:
Spelling issues: The author’s name or title may be misspelled or abbreviated in the Copyright Office database.
Variations in names: The book may be registered under a different name (e.g., publisher’s name, pen name, or co-author’s name).
Different title: Registrations sometimes use a working title, series title, or alternate title.
Date ranges: Make sure you expand the date search if you’re unsure when the book was registered.
Data entry quirks: Older registrations may not be digitized or may appear in formats that don’t match modern search expectations. Use the advanced search function and try out different combinations of search. If you still cannot locate a registration:
Review your publishing contract to see if the publisher was responsible for registering the copyright.
If the publisher agreed to register, contact them and ask for confirmation and a copy of the registration certificate.
If neither you nor your publisher registered the book, your book will not be added to the class. However, if your contract stipulates that your publisher will register copyright in your name—and the publisher failed to do so—then you may have a breach of contract claim against the publisher.
We are grateful that Macmillan has stepped up and offered to make authors whole for the lost settlement award as a result of the publisher’s failure to register copyright, and we hope that other publishers will follow suit. We are working on getting more information on books that were rejected due to publishers’ failure to register copyright.
Settlement Fund
Anthropic’s funding of the settlement proceeds is scheduled in four installments:
$300 million by October 2, 2025 (within a week of preliminary approval)
$300 million within a week of final approval
$450 million by September 25, 2026 (within 12 months of preliminary approval, subject to financing)
$450 million by September 25, 2027 (within 24 months of preliminary approval, or sooner if specified funding milestones are met)
Anthropic may choose to fund in full earlier.
Key Deadlines
October 2, 2025: Settlement website updated with Works List and Claim Forms
November 10, 2025: Major publishers provide author contact information to Settlement Administrator
November 30, 2025: Email and postal mail notices sent out. Contact Settlement Administrator if you have not received one by calling 877-206-2314 or emailing info@AnthropicCopyrightSettlement.com
January 29, 2026: Opt-out deadline
January 29, 2026: Objection deadline
March 9, 2026: Re-inclusion deadline (for those who opted out but changed their minds)
March 30, 2026: CLAIMS DEADLINE
May 14, 2026: Final approval (fairness) hearing (2 p.m. PT)
June 11, 2026: Settlement Administrator calculates distributions (subject to change)
June 2026 or later: Payment disbursement begins (subject to change)
Webinar Resources
On Thursday, October 16, 2025, we held a webinar on the Bartz v. Anthropic settlement. Co-lead counsels Rachel Geman of Lieff Cabraser Heimann & Bernstein, LLP, and Rohit Nath of Susman Godfrey LLP discussed what authors should know about their rights and how to prepare and submit claim forms with Authors Guild CEO Mary Rasenberger.
The presentation slides and a transcript of the webinar Q&A are below.
Webinar Slides (PDF)
Webinar Q&A (PDF)
FAQs
Click here to read our updated FAQ on the Anthropic settlement.
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Authors Guild AI-Related Model Publishing Contract Clauses
Bartz v. Anthropic Settlement: What Authors Need to Know
Bartz v. Anthropic Settlement: FAQs
How to File a Claim in the Anthropic Settlement: Step-by-Step Guide
FAQs on the Authors Guild’s Positions and Advocacy Around Generative AI
AI Licensing: What Authors Should Know