SKIP NAVIGATION
BREAKING
Stock futures inch higher as traders weather latest rise in Treasury yields
MARKETS
BUSINESS
INVESTING
TECH
POLITICS & POLICY
VIDEO
INVESTING CLUB
PRO
LIVESTREAM
Search quotes, news & videos
WATCHLIST
SIGN IN
CREATE FREE ACCOUNT
TECH
OpenAI’s Altman admits defense deal ‘looked opportunistic and sloppy’ amid backlash
PUBLISHED MON, MAR 2 20269:50 PM ESTUPDATED TUE, MAR 3 20261:06 AM EST
Dylan Butts
@IN/DYLAN-B-7A451A107
SHARE
Share Article via Facebook
Share Article via Twitter
Share Article via LinkedIn
Share Article via Email
KEY POINTS
Altman said OpenAI rushed its deal with the Defense Department and moved to revise the terms.
The company said its tools would not be used by intelligence agencies, among other tweaks.
The agreement with OpenAI followed a federal ban on Anthropic’s AI tools.
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman during a media tour of a Stargate AI data center in Abilene, Texas, Sept. 23, 2025.
Bloomberg | Bloomberg | Getty Images
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman said Monday that the company “shouldn’t have rushed” its recent deal with the U.S. Department of Defense and outlined revisions to the agreement.
Altman shared what he described as a repost of an internal memo on X, saying the company would amend the contract to include new language regarding its principles on topics like surveillance.
That included wording to clarify that “the AI system shall not be intentionally used for domestic surveillance of U.S. persons and nationals.”
The memo added that “the Department understands the limitation to prohibit deliberate tracking, surveillance, or monitoring of U.S. persons or nationals, including through the procurement or use of commercially acquired personal or identifiable information.”
The changes come after the ChatGPT maker announced it had struck a new deal with the Defense Department on Friday, just hours after U.S. President Donald Trump directed federal agencies to stop using rival AI company Anthropic’s tools, and hours before Washington would carry out strikes on Iran.
According to Altman, the Defense Department had also affirmed that OpenAI’s tools would not be used by intelligence agencies such as the NSA.
“There are many things the technology just isn’t ready for, and many areas we don’t yet understand the tradeoffs required for safety,” Altman said, adding that the company would work with the Pentagon on technical safeguards.
The CEO also admitted he had made a mistake and “shouldn’t have rushed” to get the deal out on Friday.
“We were genuinely trying to de-escalate things and avoid a much worse outcome, but I think it just looked opportunistic and sloppy,” he said in the post.
The acknowledgment comes after a public feud between Anthropic and Washington over safeguards for its Claude AI systems, which ended without an agreement. Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth said Friday the company would be designated a supply-chain threat.
Following an initial deal last year, Anthropic was the first AI lab to deploy its models across the Defense Department’s classified network.
The company had later sought guarantees that its tools would not be used for purposes such as domestic surveillance in the U.S., or to operate and develop autonomous weapons without human control.
The dispute began after it was revealed that Anthropic’s Claude had been used by the U.S. military in its raid to capture Venezuelan president Nicolás Maduro in January, though the company did not publicly object to that use case.
OpenAI’s deal with the Pentagon came right after talks between Anthropic and the Defense Department broke down, though Altman had told employees in a Thursday memo that OpenAI shared the same “red lines” as Anthropic. The company also said in a post on Friday that the Defense Department agreed to the company’s restrictions.
It remains unclear why the Defense Department agreed to accommodate OpenAI and not Anthropic, though government officials have for months criticized Anthropic for allegedly being overly concerned with AI safety.
The timing of OpenAI’s deal with the Defense Department prompted online backlash, with many users reportedly ditching ChatGPT for Claude on app stores.
In his post, Altman further addressed the controversy, saying: “In my conversations over the weekend, I reiterated that Anthropic should not be designated as a [supply chain risk], and that we hope the [Department of Defense] offers them the same terms we’ve agreed to.”
Anthropic was founded in 2021 by a group of former OpenAI staff and researchers, who left the company after disagreements over its direction. The company has marketed itself as a “safety-first” alternative.
WATCH NOW
VIDEO01:46
Activists’ chalk appeals to OpenAI employees in wake of Pentagon deal
— CNBC’s Ashley Capoot contributed to this report
Choose CNBC as your preferred source on Google and never miss a moment from the most trusted name in business news.
WATCH LIVESTREAM
Prefer to Listen?
NOW
Mad Money
UP NEXT
Shark Tank
TRENDING NOW
Trump tries to rename AI ‘super intelligence’ as polls show him sinking on key issue
Trump Accounts will auto-enroll children, potentially adding 60 million accounts: Treasury
Stock futures inch higher as traders weather latest rise in Treasury yields
Education Department extends deadline for student loan interest rate discount
Trump says he and tech leaders signed AI agreement that is ‘morally binding’
Sponsored Links
FROM THE WEB
Hiroshi Closes His Knife Shop After 55 Years
Sakura Knives
Learn More
Smart Reading Glasses: Auto-Focus & Zoom for Clear Vision, Near and Far.
Olygee
Shop Now
Subscribe to CNBC PRO
Subscribe to Investing Club
Licensing & Reprints
CNBC Councils
Select Personal Finance
Join the CNBC Panel
Closed Captioning
Digital Products
News Releases
Internships
Corrections
About CNBC
Site Map
Podcasts
Careers
Help
Contact
News Tips
Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.
GET IN TOUCH
CNBC Newsletters
Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inbox
SIGN UP NOW
Get this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services.
Advertise With Us
PLEASE CONTACT US
Ad Choices
Privacy Policy
Your Privacy Choices
CA Notice
Terms of Service
© 2026 Versant Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Versant Media Company.
Data is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.
Market Data Terms of Use and Disclaimers
Data also provided by
This site is now part of Versant. By continuing, you agree to our Terms. You also acknowledge that our updated Privacy Policy applies, including your existing data. For info on your data rights, click “Your Privacy Choices” or see “Your Rights” in our Privacy Policy.
We and our partners also use tools on this site to provide the services, personalize your experience, and for analytics, marketing, and advertising. If you previously opted out of selling, sharing, or targeted advertising on this site, you will need to update your Privacy Choice.
Your Privacy Choices Continue