InfoQ Homepage
News
OpenAI GPT Store Is A Nascent Marketplace For Custom ChatGPTs
AI, ML & DATA ENGINEERING
When AI Accelerates Development, Can Your CI Pipeline Keep Up? (Webinar Oct 8th)
OpenAI GPT Store is a Nascent Marketplace for Custom ChatGPTs
JAN 12, 2024 2 MIN READ
by
Sergio De Simone
FOLLOW
Follow us on
Youtube
232K Followers
Linkedin
26K Followers
Instagram
New
RSS
19K Readers
X
57.1k Followers
Facebook
21K Likes
Bluesky
New
LIKE
OpenAI has started rolling out its new GPT Store, announced a few months ago along with GPTs, to provide a mechanism for ChatGPT Plus, Team and Enterprise users to share custom ChatGPT-based chatbots they create.
According to OpenAI, since GPTs were announced, users have created over three million custom versions of ChatGPT in a diverse range of categories, including DALL·E, writing, research, programming, education, and lifestyle. In addition to category search, the GPT Store makes it possible to browse popular and trending GPTs on the community leaderboard.
Examples of GPTs OpenAI is currently highlighting include personalized trail recommendations from AllTrails, synthesized search results from 200 million academic papers from Consensus, learning math and science with the CK-12 Flexi AI tutor, and more.
The GPT Store does not support monetization yet, but OpenAI says they will launch a revenue program in the next few months:
As a first step, US builders will be paid based on user engagement with their GPTs. We'll provide details on the criteria for payments as we get closer.
Initial reactions to the announcement include some skepticism rooted on the quality of the GPTs that are currently available, but it is not clear yet whether the GPT Store will end up looking like Apple’s App Store or the Google Play Store, with their review process and editorial vetting, or will follow a distinctive model.
On a related note, it is worth noting that researchers from safety firm Adversa AI showed that GPTs may be tricked into leaking how they were built, including prompts, API names, and uploaded document metadata and content. OpenAI has promptly patched all the vulnerabilities uncovered by Adversa AI researchers, but users should be aware that security is a concern in the ChatGPT world, too.
GPTs provide a mechanism to combine ChatGPT with custom instructions, external knowledge, and any combination of skills. They provide a way to customize ChatGPT for specific uses, as exemplified above. One major advantage of GPTs, says OpenAI, is they do not require coding skills. Rather, you engage with ChatGPT itself to describe what you want to create, then define instructions, conversation starters, and external knowledge bases. If required, you can also integrate capabilities, i.e., external tools, and actions, i.e., calls to external services.
In an unrelated announcement, OpenAI has launched a new plan for smaller teams which includes a shared workspace supporting DALL·E 3, GPT-4 with Vision, Browsing, Advanced Data Analysis, and user management through separate admin tools. Similarly to the ChatGPT Enterprise plan, the ChatGPT Team plan includes a guarantee that OpenAI will not use customers' data and conversations to train their model, nor to learn from customer interaction with ChatGPT.
About the Author
Sergio De Simone
Sergio De Simone is a software engineer. Sergio has been working as a software engineer for over twenty five years across a range of different projects and companies, including such different work environments as Siemens, HP, and small startups. For the last 10+ years, his focus has been on development for mobile platforms and related technologies. He is currently working for BigML, Inc., where he leads iOS and macOS development.
Show more
This content is in the AI, ML & Data Engineering topic
FOLLOW TOPIC
Related Topics:
AI, ML & DATA ENGINEERING
CHATBOTS
OPENAI
CHATGPT
LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS
POPULAR IN AI, ML & DATA ENGINEERING
Google Open-Sources AX a Kubernetes Style Orchestrator for Autonomous AI Agents
Beyond Kubernetes at Modal: How to Scale 1 Million Concurrent Sandboxes in Seconds
Graphify: Unifying Codebase Context to Streamline Agentic Software Engineering
Stateless MCP Removes Session Affinity Requirements for AWS Server Deployments
The Agent Harness: What it is and Two Ways to Build One
RELATED SPONSORS
The Practical Agentic Coding Playbook
Context Lake vs. Data Lake: A New Architecture for Modern AI
Understanding Postgres Performance Limits for Analytics on Live Data
AI-Native Software Delivery - Download the eBook (By O'Reilly)
The State of AI in Software Engineering
RELATED SPONSOR
Automated code transformation at scale. Fix vulnerabilities, migrate frameworks, and modernize legacy code across every repo. Try Moderne Free.
RELATED CONTENT
OpenAI DevDay 2026 Recap for Developers
OCT 02, 2026
OpenAI Introduces Triage Framework and Case Studies to Report Model Misalignment
SEP 18, 2026
OpenAI Releases GPT-6 Astra for Coding and Computer Use
SEP 10, 2026
Icon
Keeping ChatGPT Fast as AI Development Accelerates
AUG 08, 2026
Independent Investigation of Hugging Face Incident Reveals How Agents Collaborated and Behaved
SEP 14, 2026
Icon
The Agent Harness: Control Planes, Invariants, and Approval Boundaries for Production AI Agents
SEP 21, 2026
Engineering Production Systems for an Agentic Era: QCon San Francisco 2026
OCT 02, 2026
DigitalOcean Managed Agents Brings Managed Cloud Infrastructure to AI Agents
OCT 02, 2026
TypeSafe AI Releases Jev: a Decision-Only Model That Returns Typed Probabilities Instead of Text
OCT 01, 2026
RELATED SPONSORS
How Morgan Stanley Is Scaling Software Modernization with Automated Refactoring
Morgan Stanley has used Moderne for nearly a year to automate large-scale refactoring and reduce technical debt. Explore their modernization journey, key successes and challenges, and how they plan to continue transforming software delivery at enterprise scale.
Gartner® Magic Quadrant™ for AI-Augmented Code Modernization Tools
The software lifecycle is being rebuilt around AI agents, but today's processes were designed for humans. Discover the first Gartner® Magic Quadrant™ for AI-augmented code modernization and the criteria shaping this emerging market.
SPONSORED BY
The InfoQ Newsletter
A round-up of last week’s content on InfoQ sent out every Tuesday. Join a community of over 250,000 senior developers. View an example
Enter your e-mail address
We protect your privacy.