Cybersecurity & Tech
Lawfare Daily: Sam Altman with Ronan Farrow and Andrew Marantz
Kate Klonick, Ronan Farrow, Andrew Marantz
Tuesday, April 14, 2026, 7:00 AM
Share On:
Share on Facebook
Share on X
Share on LinkedIn
Share on BlueSky
Share on Threads
Print this article
Ronan Farrow and Andrew Marantz discuss their recent article in the New Yorker on Sam Altman, the CEO of OpenAI.
Kate Klonick
Ronan Farrow
Andrew Marantz
Meet The Authors
Subscribe to Lawfare
Senior Editor Kate Klonick interviews reporters Ronan Farrow and Andrew Marantz on their recent article in the New Yorker, titled “Sam Altman May Control Our Future—Can He Be Trusted?” In their 16,000-word piece, Farrow and Marantz create a cohesive narrative with receipts around Sam Altman, the products he's building at OpenAI, and how he's selling them not just to investors and the public, but also to regulators and world leaders.
Klonick unpacks three key areas that are discussed in the piece: potential concerns of fraud, ongoing trust and safety and alignment issues at OpenAI, and the national security concerns that the article exposes in the "country plan" and Altman's entanglements in the Gulf. The discussion ends with a basic question: Are any of these legal issues enough to stop or correct the course of OpenAI, with its estimated $1T IPO in the coming weeks?
To receive ad-free podcasts, become a Lawfare Material Supporter at www.patreon.com/lawfare. You can also support Lawfare by making a one-time donation at https://givebutter.com/lawfare-institute.
Click the button below to view a transcript of this podcast. Please note that the transcript was auto-generated and may contain errors.
Transcript
Topics:
Cybersecurity & Tech
Back to Top
Kate Klonick
Read More
Kate Klonick is an Associate Professor at St. John’s University Law School, a fellow at the Brookings Institution, Yale Law School’s Information Society Project, Harvard Berkman Klein Center and a Distinguished Scholar at the Institute for Humane Studies. Her writing on online speech, freedom of expression, and private internet platform governance has appeared in the Harvard Law Review, Yale Law Journal, The New Yorker, the New York Times, The Atlantic, the Washington Post and numerous other publications. For the 2023-2024 academic year, she was a Fulbright Schuman Innovation Scholar in the European Union where she was a Visiting Professor at SciencesPo and University of Amsterdam researching and writing about the Digital Services Act and Digital Markets Act.
Ronan Farrow
Read More
Ronan Farrow is an investigative reporter and a contributing writer to The New Yorker.
Andrew Marantz
Read More
Andrew Marantz is a staff writer at The New Yorker.
}
More Articles
'Rogue' AI Isn't Going Anywhere
Tom Uren
Oct 2, 2026
The latest edition of the Seriously Risky Business cybersecurity newsletter, now on Lawfare.
Lawfare Daily: The Trump-Xi Summit and U.S.-China AI Competition
Peter E. Harrell Martin Chorzempa Jen Patja
Oct 2, 2026
A Warning for Frontier AI Model Governance
Mailyn Fidler Matt Kristoffersen
Oct 1, 2026
As Congress debates who should control frontier AI governance, “cybersecurity” can become a substitute for reasoning about hard policy choices.
Other Topics
Armed Conflict
Congress
Courts & Litigation
Criminal Justice & Rule of Law
Cybersecurity & Tech
Democracy & Elections
Executive Branch
Foreign Relations & International Law
Intelligence
States & Localities
Surveillance & Privacy
Terrorism & Extremism
Subscribe to Lawfare
Email Address *
First Name
Last Name
Newsletters
Today on Lawfare
The Week That Was
Bot Input
Subscribe