Today, OpenAI, a nonprofit artificial intelligence research company was announced to the world. Its director, Ilya Sutskever, is a research scientist at Google. This comes a day after Facebook open-sourced its AI hardware.
Its reason for existing was explained in an introductory post:
Our goal is to advance digital intelligence in the way that is most likely to benefit humanity as a whole, unconstrained by a need to generate financial return.
Former Stripe CTO Greg Brockman is taking the same position for OpenAI. There are quite a few other interesting names involved, including Y Combinator’s Sam Altman and Tesla/SpaceX’s Elon Musk acting as co-chairs:
The group’s other founding members are world-class research engineers and scientists: Trevor Blackwell, Vicki Cheung, Andrej Karpathy, Durk Kingma, John Schulman, Pamela Vagata, and Wojciech Zaremba. Pieter Abbeel, Yoshua Bengio, Alan Kay, Sergey Levine, and Vishal Sikka are advisors to the group. OpenAI’s co-chairs are Sam Altman and Elon Musk.
Meta’s AI Tamagotchi bet is...working? | Equity Podcast
0 seconds of 33 minutes, 35 secondsVolume 0%
The organization is being funded by Altman, Brockman, Musk, Jessica Livingston, Peter Thiel, Amazon Web Services, Infosys and YC Research. Those funders have contributed $1 billion thus far. Musk has been donating money to make sure that AI doesn’t go the way of Skynet, so it’s nice to know that his involvement will have a safety lens on it.
Topics
AI
Artificial Intelligence (AI)
consumer
developers
Elon Musk
Facebook
jessica livingston
Media & Entertainment
non-profit
OpenAI
Peter Theil
philanthropy
sam altman
Startups
When you purchase through links in our articles, we may earn a small commission. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.
Drew Olanoff
Drew is a geek who first worked at AOL when he was 16 years old. Drew was a senior writer at TechCrunch. Most recently, Drew was the VP of Communications for venture equity fund Scaleworks.
View Bio
October 13 – 15
San Francisco
Get 50% off a second pass
The Disrupt experience is meant to be shared. Get your pass and bring a colleague, partner, or peer at 50% off. Cover more ground by making connections, building momentum, and discovering what’s next in the startup ecosystem.
BOOK NOW
Most Popular
Crusoe abandons $1.25B plan to use Boom turbines at AI data centers
Astra and Opus just passed Turing’s other test
Oracle sends force majeure notice on its New Mexico Stargate data center
Meta made a Tamagotchi-like wearable for its Muse AI agent
Vogue sent robots down the runway at Vogue World, and people were not impressed
Anthropic says its biology lab has already found something big
PitPro’s first tire-changing robot goes live in Canada