Artificial Intelligence
Ex-OpenAI CTO Mira Murati Testifies About Sam Altman Allegedly Lying to Her
She just transformed a known anecdote into a deposition given under oath.
By
Mike Pearl
Published May 6, 2026, 9:43 pm ET
Reading time 2 minutes
Mira Murati © PATRICK T. FALLON/AFP via Getty Images
Read Later
Read Later
Comments
(27)
OpenAI’s former CTO Mira Murati just testified under oath that CEO Sam Altman didn’t tell the truth to her, and that his habits interfered with her ability to do her job. The allegation in question, that Altman lied about safety practices, was already public, having featured heavily in a recent New Yorker feature about Altman. Now it’s court testimony.
For a few weird days in 2023, Murati was an interim CEO of OpenAI after Altman was briefly fired (And then OpenAI very briefly picked another CEO, Emmett Shear ). Reports from this chaotic time paint a picture of a working relationship between Altman and Murati that came under strain when Murati lost Altman’s trust. Behind-the-scenes accounts say she sent memos to the company’s board of directors and Altman himself, questioning Altman’s managerial abilities, and that his termination soon followed.
On Wednesday, a video deposition from Murati was shown to the court during the Musk v. Altman court proceedings , in which she testified to the truth of this story. A new model was being prepared for release—which the New Yorker says was GPT-4 Turbo—and in her testimony, as described by the Verge , she said Altman told her OpenAI’s legal department, headed at the time by Jason Kwon, said it wasn’t necessary for the OpenAI safety board to review the model.
The person asking questions in the deposition asked, “As you understand it, was Mr. Altman telling the truth when he made that statement to you?”
To which Murati said, “No.” She later explained in her testimony, according to the Verge, “I confirmed that what Jason was saying and what Sam was saying were not the same thing.” She characterized this as a “misalignment” between Altman and Kwon. Kwon is now OpenAI’s chief strategy officer .
According to Reuters , Murati said in her testimony, “My concern was about Sam saying one thing to one person and completely the opposite to another person.” She also reportedly testified that Altman had been “creating chaos.” She described OpenAI at this time as “at catastrophic risk of falling apart,” and said she was “concerned about the company completely blowing up,” according to Reuters.
According to the New Yorker, Murati’s memos to Altman and the board came soon after this interaction, and “Soon afterward, the board made its decision to fire Altman.” Murati was interim CEO for a handful of days, then Shear stepped in for a few days, and then Altman was reinstated, a move Murati publicly supported .
According to Forbes , Murati testified Wednesday that after his return to OpenAI, Altman continued with behaviors that had worried her, including delays around important decisions, and giving inconsistent messages to different coworkers, which she reportedly said created a “very difficult and chaotic environment.”
About ten months after Sam Altman was reinstated as CEO, Murati left , and a few month later, founded her own AI company .
Explore more on these topics
Elon Musk
OpenAI
Sam Altman
Trials
Share this story
Copied!
Sign up for our newsletters
Subscribe and interact with our community, get up to date with our customised Newsletters and much more.
Gizmodo
io9
Earther
The Next Interface
Subscribe now
Leave this field empty if you're human:
15,000 VHS Tapes and Counting: Meet the Guys Preserving the Weirdest Parts of the Analog Era
Latest news
Sep 29
5:15 pm
Apple’s New CEO Looking to Cut Jobs and Push for Faster Product Launches
Sep 29
5:00 pm
With Dots, OpenAI Wants You to Stop Being Afraid of Its AI Agents
Sep 29
4:59 pm
With No Astra to Release, OpenAI Pivots to New GPT-6.1 Sol Model
Sep 29
4:50 pm
Scientists Dated the Catastrophic Pompeii Eruption Using Only Rocks. Here’s How Close They Got
Sep 29
4:25 pm
El Niño’s Dreaded ‘Kelvin Wave’ Is About to Hit California
Sep 29
4:10 pm
Nazi Germany Couldn’t Have Built a Working Reactor, Let Alone a Bomb, Study Finds
Sep 29
4:02 pm
Surfshark Is 85% Off, and Its Antivirus Bundle Costs Barely More Than the VPN Alone
Sep 29
3:30 pm
GLP-1 Needles Tossed in the Trash Are Injuring Sanitation Workers
Show All Latest news
Latest Reviews
Sep 29
11:15 am
Apple Watch Ultra 4 Review: Still the Best Health Buddy for Your Wrist
Sep 28
6:30 am
Mova LiDAX Pro 800 Review: This Robomower Tried to Mow Me Down
Sep 27
8:30 am
iRobot Roomba Max 775 Review: A Respectable Roomba Redux
Sep 22
12:35 pm
Sonos Ace Ultra Review: Headphones That Only Hardcore Sonos Fans Could Love
Sep 21
9:00 am
M6 Mac mini Review: A Better Tiny Desktop, With or Without AI
Sep 20
8:30 am
Aqara Multi-Sensor FP400 Review: Not Quite the mmWave of the Future
Sep 17
10:00 am
Alienware’s AW3926QW Ultrawide Gaming Monitor Review: Size Really Does Matter
Sep 16
8:00 am
iPhone 18 Pro and 18 Pro Max Review: Apple Is Just Flexing Hard Now
Show All Latest Reviews
Related Articles
Your Body Heat Could Power the Next Generation of Wearables
Thermoelectric generators probably won’t eliminate the charger for your Apple Watch, but for smaller, screenless wearables, the heat constantly escaping from your skin could fundamentally change how we power our devices.
Gadgets
John Loeffler
Sep 25
With Dots, OpenAI Wants You to Stop Being Afraid of Its AI Agents
Following in Meta's footsteps, the company is putting a cutesy face on its technology.
Artificial Intelligence
Webb Wright
Sep 29
With No Astra to Release, OpenAI Pivots to New GPT-6.1 Sol Model
Different name, supposedly less risk.
Artificial Intelligence
AJ Dellinger
Sep 29
•
OpenAI Cancels Release of GPT-6.1 Astra Because It ‘Regressed’ on Safety
It doesn’t sound like it morphed into a diabolical hacker. It mostly just screwed up.
Artificial Intelligence
Mike Pearl
Sep 28
Florida Man Wants OpenAI to Stop New Models Until We Figure Out What the Hell Is Going On
"It is only by the grace of the Almighty that one of Defendants' AI agents hasn’t compromised a water supply or shut down a power grid—yet."
Artificial Intelligence
Matt Novak
Sep 28
The Least Worried Man in AI Has a Plan to Rein in Rogue Agents
Nvidia is promoting its new Agent Safety Platform as a new industry standard for AI security, while its CEO waves aside calls for regulation.
Artificial Intelligence
Webb Wright
Sep 28