SKIP NAVIGATION
BREAKING
Stock futures inch higher as traders weather latest rise in Treasury yields
MARKETS
BUSINESS
INVESTING
TECH
POLITICS & POLICY
VIDEO
INVESTING CLUB
PRO
LIVESTREAM
Search quotes, news & videos
WATCHLIST
SIGN IN
CREATE FREE ACCOUNT
TECH
OpenAI completes restructure, solidifying Microsoft as a major shareholder
PUBLISHED TUE, OCT 28 20259:06 AM EDTUPDATED TUE, OCT 28 20254:12 PM EDT
Ashley Capoot
@/IN/ASHLEY-CAPOOT/
SHARE
Share Article via Facebook
Share Article via Twitter
Share Article via LinkedIn
Share Article via Email
KEY POINTS
OpenAI has completed its restructuring into a nonprofit with a controlling equity stake in its for-profit business.
The nonprofit holds an equity stake currently worth about $130 billion in its for-profit arm.
Microsoft, which has backed the company since 2019, will hold roughly 27% in OpenAI Group PBC.
In this article
MSFT
+0.64 (+0.13%)
Follow your favorite stocks
CREATE FREE ACCOUNT
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman speaks during the Snowflake Summit in San Francisco on June 2, 2025.
Justin Sullivan | Getty Images News | Getty Images
OpenAI on Tuesday announced it has completed its recapitalization, cementing its structure as a nonprofit with a controlling stake in its for-profit business.
The artificial intelligence startup said its nonprofit is now called the OpenAI Foundation, and it holds an equity stake worth about $130 billion in its for-profit arm. OpenAI said its for-profit arm is now a public benefit corporation called OpenAI Group PBC.
Under the new structure, the OpenAI Foundation will hold a 26% stake in the for-profit, with 47% held by current and former employees and investors.
Microsoft
, which has invested more than $13 billion in OpenAI and backed the company as early as 2019, said it supports OpenAI’s recapitalization and now holds an investment in the PBC that is valued at $135 billion, or roughly 27% of the company on an as-converted diluted basis.
The company said it previously held a 32.5% stake in the for-profit on an as-converted basis, excluding OpenAI’s recent funding rounds.
Microsoft shares closed up 1.98% on Tuesday.
“The more OpenAI succeeds as a company, the more the non-profit’s equity stake will be worth, which the non-profit will use to fund its philanthropic work,” OpenAI said in a blog post.
Read more CNBC tech news
Zuckerberg, Amodei among tech executives set to meet Trump Tuesday
OpenAI sparked Hugging Face bids with early investment offer ahead of Nvidia’s $13 billion deal
Nvidia releases software platform to stop AI agents from misbehaving
SpaceX launches its massive Starship rocket into orbit for the first time
OpenAI was founded as a nonprofit research lab in 2015, but has become one of the fastest-growing commercial entities on the planet in recent years. The startup is currently valued at $500 billion.
In 2024, the company announced plans to convert into a for-profit company, which would have wrested control from the nonprofit and kept it as a separate arm. But after facing pressure from civic leaders and ex-employees, OpenAI said in May that its nonprofit would retain control.
The OpenAI Foundation will make an initial $25 billion commitment to work to accelerate health breakthroughs and technical solutions to AI resilience, OpenAI said Tuesday.
As part of the announcement, Microsoft said OpenAI has agreed to purchase an incremental $250 billion of Azure services, though Microsoft will no longer have a first right of refusal to be OpenAI’s compute provider.
The companies also outlined several additional changes to their partnership.
When OpenAI says it has reached Artificial General Intelligence, or AGI, which is a term for an AI system that rivals or exceeds human intelligence, that claim will have to be verified by an independent expert panel, Microsoft said. The revenue share agreement between the two companies will remain until that panel verifies AGI.
Microsoft can now pursue AGI independently or in collaboration with third parties, and OpenAI can now jointly develop some products with third parties.
OpenAI remains Microsoft’s frontier model partner. Microsoft said its IP rights for both models and products are extended through 2032, and include models post-AGI. OpenAI’s consumer hardware is excluded from Microsoft’s IP rights.
“As we step into this next chapter of our partnership, both companies are better positioned than ever to continue building great products that meet real-world needs, and create new opportunity for everyone and every business,” Microsoft said in a statement.
Microsoft is slated to report fiscal first-quarter 2026 results after market close on Wednesday.
WATCH: OpenAI begins to threaten software stocks
WATCH NOW
VIDEO01:42
OpenAI begins to threaten software stocks
Choose CNBC as your preferred source on Google and never miss a moment from the most trusted name in business news.
WATCH LIVESTREAM
Prefer to Listen?
NOW
Mad Money
UP NEXT
Shark Tank
TRENDING NOW
Trump tries to rename AI ‘super intelligence’ as polls show him sinking on key issue
Trump Accounts will auto-enroll children, potentially adding 60 million accounts: Treasury
Trump says he and tech leaders signed AI agreement that is ‘morally binding’
Education Department extends deadline for student loan interest rate discount
The Fed’s main inflation measure will be released Wednesday. Here’s what to expect
Subscribe to CNBC PRO
Subscribe to Investing Club
Licensing & Reprints
CNBC Councils
Select Personal Finance
Join the CNBC Panel
Closed Captioning
Digital Products
News Releases
Internships
Corrections
About CNBC
Site Map
Podcasts
Careers
Help
Contact
News Tips
Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.
GET IN TOUCH
CNBC Newsletters
Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inbox
SIGN UP NOW
Get this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services.
Advertise With Us
PLEASE CONTACT US
Ad Choices
Privacy Policy
Your Privacy Choices
CA Notice
Terms of Service
© 2026 Versant Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Versant Media Company.
Data is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.
Market Data Terms of Use and Disclaimers
Data also provided by
This site is now part of Versant. By continuing, you agree to our Terms. You also acknowledge that our updated Privacy Policy applies, including your existing data. For info on your data rights, click “Your Privacy Choices” or see “Your Rights” in our Privacy Policy.
We and our partners also use tools on this site to provide the services, personalize your experience, and for analytics, marketing, and advertising. If you previously opted out of selling, sharing, or targeted advertising on this site, you will need to update your Privacy Choice.
Your Privacy Choices Continue