Media
Published
December 13, 2024 8:10am EST
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman to donate $1 million to Trump's inaugural fund
The tech titan says he's 'eager to support' Trump's efforts to lead US into 'the age of AI'
• Facebook
• Twitter
• Threads
• Print
• Email
• Add Fox Business on Google
By Kristen Altus FOXBusiness
close
video
Sam Altman: AI is a 'scientific achievement of humanity' that will be embedded in everything
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman and Anduril Industries co-founder and CEO Brian Schimpf discuss the future of AI and the ethical use of technology on 'Making Money.'
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman is joining the list of U.S. tech titans donating to President-elect Trump's inaugural fund, a spokesperson exclusively told Fox News Digital.
"President Trump will lead our country into the age of AI, and I am eager to support his efforts to ensure America stays ahead," Altman said in a written statement.
Altman reportedly plans on making a personal commitment of $1 million to the Presidential Inaugural Committee, as opposed to the gift coming directly from OpenAI.
The news comes on the heels of Mark Zuckerberg’s Meta Platforms and Jeff Bezos’ Amazon both announcing $1 million to the inauguration fund, in moves that allegedly work to smooth ties with the incoming commander-in-chief.
TRUMP'S INAUGURAL FUND RECEIVES $1 MILLION DONATION FROM MARK ZUCKERBERG'S META: REPORT
Bezos will be donating through Amazon, The Wall Street Journal reported, while Zuckerberg promised the Meta gift while attending Trump’s Thanksgiving dinner at his Mar-a-Lago estate in Palm Beach, Florida.
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman will reportedly make a personal donation soon to President-elect Trump's inauguration. (Getty Images)
Altman, who revolutionized the artificial intelligence industry with the creation of ChatGPT, told "Fox News Sunday" earlier this month that he is looking forward to working with the incoming Trump administration, emphasizing how "super important" it is for the U.S. and its allies to lead the charge on infrastructure that will support cutting-edge AI development, especially in the tech race against China.
"AI is a little bit different than other kinds of software in that it requires massive amounts of infrastructure, power, computer chips, data centers, and we need to build that here, and we need to be able to have the best A.I. infrastructure in the world to be able to lead with the technology and the capabilities," Altman said. "I believe President-elect Trump will be very good at that."
close
video
OpenAI chief urges US to maintain 'lead' in AI developments: 'Critically important'
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman sits down with Shannon Bream to discuss the positives and potential negatives of artificial intelligence and the importance of maintaining a lead in the AI industry over China.
"[I] look forward to working with [the Trump] administration on it," the tech CEO continued. "It does seem to us like this is going to be very important. It does seem like this will be one of these unusually important moments in the history of technology. And we very much believe that the United States and our allies need to lead this."
OpenAI’s leader also spoke with FOX Business’ Charles Payne days later, expanding on the importance of AI in America’s national security landscape.
GET FOX BUSINESS ON THE GO BY CLICKING HERE
close
video
Maye Musk says 'we are winning,' talks where the world is heading under Trump and Elon's leadership
Author, model and Elon Musk's mother, Maye Musk, reacts to her son's net worth milestone, increased attention around her family and says America is headed towards an 'honest' future.
"This is incredibly high stakes. AI is here," he said, "AI is going to impact a lot of what we do… The United States has got to lead in AI innovation. This technology is going to be used by our adversaries. We’ve got to use it to help defend American troops."
Other tech tycoons who supported Trump throughout his campaign include Tesla CEO Elon Musk; Palantir Technologies co-founder Joe Lonsdale; venture capitalist David Sacks; Andreessen Horowitz founders Ben Horowitz and Marc Andreessen; and cryptocurrency exchange Gemini co-founders Tyler and Cameron Winklevoss.
READ MORE FROM FOX BUSINESS
FOX Business’ Stephen Sorace and Nikolas Lanum contributed to this report.
U.S. Stock Market Quotes
Advertisement
Advertisement
Advertisement
Arrives Weekly
Get Our Newsletter
Get a brief on the top business stories of the week, plus CEO interviews, market updates, tech and money news that matters to you.
We've added you to our mailing list.
Subscribe
By clicking subscribe, you agree to the Fox News Privacy Policy and Terms of Use , and agree to receive content and promotional communications from Fox News. You understand that you can opt-out at any time.