MEDIA Published December 13, 2024 8:10am EST
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman to donate $1 million to Trump's inaugural fund
The tech titan says he's 'eager to support' Trump's efforts to lead US into 'the age of AI'
Facebook
Twitter
Threads
Print
Email
Add Fox Business on Google
By Kristen Altus FOXBusiness
Sam Altman: AI is a 'scientific achievement of humanity' that will be embedded in everything
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman and Anduril Industries co-founder and CEO Brian Schimpf discuss the future of AI and the ethical use of technology on 'Making Money.'
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman is joining the list of U.S. tech titans donating to President-elect Trump's inaugural fund, a spokesperson exclusively told Fox News Digital.
"President Trump will lead our country into the age of AI, and I am eager to support his efforts to ensure America stays ahead," Altman said in a written statement.
Altman reportedly plans on making a personal commitment of $1 million to the Presidential Inaugural Committee, as opposed to the gift coming directly from OpenAI.
The news comes on the heels of Mark Zuckerberg’s Meta Platforms and Jeff Bezos’ Amazon both announcing $1 million to the inauguration fund, in moves that allegedly work to smooth ties with the incoming commander-in-chief.
TRUMP'S INAUGURAL FUND RECEIVES $1 MILLION DONATION FROM MARK ZUCKERBERG'S META: REPORT
Bezos will be donating through Amazon, The Wall Street Journal reported, while Zuckerberg promised the Meta gift while attending Trump’s Thanksgiving dinner at his Mar-a-Lago estate in Palm Beach, Florida.
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman will reportedly make a personal donation soon to President-elect Trump's inauguration. (Getty Images)
Altman, who revolutionized the artificial intelligence industry with the creation of ChatGPT, told "Fox News Sunday" earlier this month that he is looking forward to working with the incoming Trump administration, emphasizing how "super important" it is for the U.S. and its allies to lead the charge on infrastructure that will support cutting-edge AI development, especially in the tech race against China.
"AI is a little bit different than other kinds of software in that it requires massive amounts of infrastructure, power, computer chips, data centers, and we need to build that here, and we need to be able to have the best A.I. infrastructure in the world to be able to lead with the technology and the capabilities," Altman said. "I believe President-elect Trump will be very good at that."
video
OpenAI chief urges US to maintain 'lead' in AI developments: 'Critically important'
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman sits down with Shannon Bream to discuss the positives and potential negatives of artificial intelligence and the importance of maintaining a lead in the AI industry over China.
"[I] look forward to working with [the Trump] administration on it," the tech CEO continued. "It does seem to us like this is going to be very important. It does seem like this will be one of these unusually important moments in the history of technology. And we very much believe that the United States and our allies need to lead this."
OpenAI’s leader also spoke with FOX Business’ Charles Payne days later, expanding on the importance of AI in America’s national security landscape.
GET FOX BUSINESS ON THE GO BY CLICKING HERE
video
Maye Musk says 'we are winning,' talks where the world is heading under Trump and Elon's leadership
Author, model and Elon Musk's mother, Maye Musk, reacts to her son's net worth milestone, increased attention around her family and says America is headed towards an 'honest' future.
"This is incredibly high stakes. AI is here," he said, "AI is going to impact a lot of what we do… The United States has got to lead in AI innovation. This technology is going to be used by our adversaries. We’ve got to use it to help defend American troops."
Other tech tycoons who supported Trump throughout his campaign include Tesla CEO Elon Musk; Palantir Technologies co-founder Joe Lonsdale; venture capitalist David Sacks; Andreessen Horowitz founders Ben Horowitz and Marc Andreessen; and cryptocurrency exchange Gemini co-founders Tyler and Cameron Winklevoss.
READ MORE FROM FOX BUSINESS
FOX Business’ Stephen Sorace and Nikolas Lanum contributed to this report.
Sponsored Stories You May Like
This Condiment on Your Table May Be Tied to Forgetfulness Cases
Proud Life
Cheapest SUVs On The Market (Explore Offers)
SearchInfoHub | Search Ads
Best Christmas Gift: Here Are 27+ Of The Coolest Gifts For 2026
gadgets
Discover Cheap SUVs (View Offers)
SearchInfoHub | Search Ads
Is This Condiment in Your Fridge? It May Be Tied to Forgetfulness
Proud Life
Physical Therapist Reveals Why Seniors Lose Leg Power—And The Simple Fix
trending-report.com
Otolaryngologists Say Chronic Tinnitus Is Linked To A Common Habit
NEWS NEBLON
Average Cost To Rent A Private Jet May Surprise You! (Take A Look)
SearchResultOffers | Search Ads
Search for occupational safety software
Yahoo Search | Safety software
Search for project software for contractors
Yahoo Search | Project software
Search for small business cell phone plans
Yahoo Search | Cell phone plans
Best Christmas Gift: Here Are 29+ Of The Coolest Gifts For 2026
OKJU
Dermatologists: The 1 Vitamin You Need If You Have Wrinkles
Anti-Aging News
Spinal Stenosis Is Not From Tight Muscles. Meet The Real Enemy of Stenosis (Stop Doing This)
RejuvaCare
Memory Loss? You're Probably Not Eating This
The Silver Age Journal
Doctors: 1 Boxed Cereal Behind Most Cases of Forgetfulness
The Silver Age Journal
Mechanics Warn: If You Drive This Brand You Should Get This Protection Plan
The Fair Insurance
30+ Hottest Ridiculously Cool Gifts You'll Want to Buy
Listgo
Neuropathy and Nerve Pain? Try This Tonight.
Nerve Calm
Boydton: New Easy Chicken Dinners [See recipes]
The Chicken Recipe Kitchen
Search for hvac field service dispatch tools
Yahoo Search | HVAC dispatch tools
This 1 Mineral Is Silencing Sciatic Nerve Pain (Unlike Any Other)
Morning Vitality
Three in four American adults have no will. The state has a formula for that.
Better Life
Mature men are all talking about this waffle-knit pullover
Auretily
Sponsored Stories
More From Fox Business
Moisturizer Won't Tighten Skin! Use This Household Item Instead
Vital Bloom
Trump lets truckers use red diesel on highways and defers fuel tax | Fox Business
Fox Business
Dermatologists: The 1 Vitamin You Need If You Have Wrinkled Skin
Vital Bloom
Tesla beats third-quarter delivery estimates as European sales rebound | Fox Business
Fox Business
Spinal Stenosis Isn't Just About Tight Muscles. Here's What May Really Be Causing It
RejuvaCare
Kevin Hassett says Powell should 'move on' to preserve Fed independence | Fox Business
Fox Business
Here Are 25 Of The Coolest Gifts For Black Friday 2026
Glosritystore
McDonald's Monopoly returns with $1 million prize, new digital gameplay | Fox Business
Fox Business
The New Volvo EX40 Is Finally Affordable (Take A Look)
SearchResultOffers | Search Ads
Tariffs on Canadian goods could reshape races in five battleground states | Fox Business
Fox Business
This 1 Common Condiment Is Now Tied to 86% of Forgetful Minds
The Wellness Insight
Energy Secretary Chris Wright says diesel relief starts on Saturday | Fox Business
Fox Business
More From Fox Business
Disney buys Yamaha's California headquarters for $115M as company moves to Georgia | Fox Business
Trump says he will send $100 Medicare Part B checks to over 20 million seniors | Fox Business
LARRY KUDLOW: Democratic talk of affordability is absolutely hilarious | Fox Business
Wealth tax would 'ruin California,' Reagan advisor Art Laffer warns | Fox Business
JD Vance announces $150M for new Alaska power grid transmission line | Fox Business
Honda plans highway test of technology that charges electric trucks while they drive | Fox Business
Baby boomers to release 14M homes, but starter home supply stays low: report | Fox Business
South Korean megachurch data breach exposes up to 850,000 records | Fox Business
Treasury's 'absolute isolation' effort against Iran is inflicting pain: official | Fox Business
Market Futures
DOW JONES FUTURES
(I:DJI)
51,702.00
-114.00 (-0.22%)
NASDAQ FUTURES
(I:COMPX)
31,435.50
-47.75 (-0.15%)
S&P 500 FUTURES
(INX)
7,871.25
-2.75 (-0.03%)
Market Update sponsored by
Advertisement
ARRIVES WEEKLY
Get Our Newsletter
Get a brief on the top business stories of the week, plus CEO interviews, market updates, tech and money news that matters to you.
Subscribe
By clicking subscribe, you agree to the Fox News Privacy Policy and Terms of Use, and agree to receive content and promotional communications from Fox News. You understand that you can opt-out at any time.
More from Fox Business
Elon Musk renames SpaceXAI to SpaceXSI | Fox Business
Union Pacific and Norfolk Southern seek fast-track merger approval | Fox Business
European diesel reserves could ease fuel prices, White House says | Fox Business
Kodiak ready to roll out driverless truck, launch autonomous freight deliveries | Fox Business
Inside Ken Griffin’s secret negotiation for Florida’s largest real estate deal | Fox Business
Sponsored Content
Search for hvac technician scheduling platforms
Yahoo Search | HVAC tech schedule