SKIP NAVIGATION
BREAKING
South Korean President Lee pushes back on Alaska LNG project after Trump touts Seoul’s participation
MARKETS
BUSINESS
INVESTING
TECH
POLITICS & POLICY
VIDEO
INVESTING CLUB
PRO
LIVESTREAM
Search quotes, news & videos
WATCHLIST
SIGN IN
CREATE FREE ACCOUNT
SPONSORED BY
AI EFFECT
AI AT WORK
AI INSIGHTS
AI IMPACT
AI EVENTS
AI AGE
Altman lashes out at ‘clearly dishonest’ Anthropic ads as AI spat heats up
PUBLISHED THU, FEB 5 20269:50 AM ESTUPDATED THU, FEB 5 20261:18 PM EST
Ashley Capoot
@/IN/ASHLEY-CAPOOT/
SHARE
Share Article via Facebook
Share Article via Twitter
Share Article via LinkedIn
Share Article via Email
KEY POINTS
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman called Anthropic’s Super Bowl ads “funny” but “clearly dishonest.”
Anthropic said that it plans to keep its chatbot Claude ad free, weeks after OpenAI announced it will begin testing ads with some ChatGPT users.
Anthropic’s Super Bowl campaign took a swipe at OpenAI and features the tagline, “Ads are coming to AI. But not to Claude.”
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman speaks during the Snowflake Summit in San Francisco on June 2, 2025.
Justin Sullivan | Getty Images News | Getty Images
After Anthropic took aim at OpenAI’s ad push in a new Super Bowl campaign on Wednesday, OpenAI CEO Sam Altman shared a post on X calling the ads “funny” but “clearly dishonest.”
OpenAI said last month that it will begin testing ads with its free users and ChatGPT Go subscribers in the U.S., and Anthropic announced Wednesday that the company plans to keep its chatbot Claude ad-free.
Anthropic seized on the opportunity and took a not-so-subtle swipe at its rival with its Super Bowl campaign, which centers around Anthropic’s decision to keep ads out of Claude. Anthropic will air a 60-second pregame ad and a 30-second in-game ad that both feature the tag line, “Ads are coming to AI. But not to Claude.”
Altman said that the commercials are “deceptive” and that OpenAI would “obviously never run ads in the way Anthropic depicts them.”
“We are not stupid and we know our users would reject that,” Altman wrote. “I guess it’s on brand for Anthropic doublespeak to use a deceptive ad to critique theoretical deceptive ads that aren’t real, but a Super Bowl ad is not where I would expect it.”
Read more CNBC tech news
Zuckerberg, Amodei among tech executives set to meet Trump Tuesday
OpenAI sparked Hugging Face bids with early investment offer ahead of Nvidia’s $13 billion deal
Nvidia releases software platform to stop AI agents from misbehaving
SpaceX launches its massive Starship rocket into orbit for the first time
A representative for Anthropic did not immediately respond to CNBC’s request for comment.
Anthropic was founded in 2021 by a group of former OpenAI researchers who left the company due to disagreements over its direction.
The two startups have been fierce rivals since Anthropic’s inception, and they’ve both raised billions of dollars of capital as they’ve jostled for users, enterprise customers and market share.
Altman said Wednesday that “Anthropic wants to control what people do with AI” and that the company “serves an expensive product to rich people.” He said OpenAI also has more free users than Anthropic does, which means OpenAI has “a differently-shaped problem than they do.”
OpenAI said last month that ads within ChatGPT will be clearly labeled, appear at the bottom of the chatbot’s answers and will not influence ChatGPT’s responses.
“As for our Super Bowl ad: it’s about builders, and how anyone can now build anything,” Altman wrote.
WATCH: OpenAI models could help power future versions of Amazon’s Alexa assistant: Source
WATCH NOW
VIDEO01:59
OpenAI models could help power future versions of Amazon’s Alexa assistant: Source
Choose CNBC as your preferred source on Google and never miss a moment from the most trusted name in business news.
RELATED
Google rolls out Gemini 4 Argon, its most advanced AI model
Trump says he and tech leaders signed AI agreement that is ‘morally binding’
OpenAI follows Meta into the red-hot market for personal agents. But will users pay?
OpenAI DevDay recap: AI lab rolls out Dots agents, Altman and Friar comment on IPO
How recent grads and college students should be thinking about AI, the CV, and the job market
MORE IN AI AGE
OpenAI follows Meta into the red-hot market for personal agents. But will users pay?
Jonathan Vanian
China wants in on U.S. AI data center boom. Here’s why
Eunice Yoon
How recent grads and college students should be thinking about AI, the CV, and the job market
Corynn Winston
READ MORE
Subscribe to CNBC PRO
Subscribe to Investing Club
Licensing & Reprints
CNBC Councils
Select Personal Finance
Join the CNBC Panel
Closed Captioning
Digital Products
News Releases
Internships
Corrections
About CNBC
Site Map
Podcasts
Careers
Help
Contact
News Tips
Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.
GET IN TOUCH
CNBC Newsletters
Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inbox
SIGN UP NOW
Get this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services.
Advertise With Us
PLEASE CONTACT US
Ad Choices
Privacy Policy
Your Privacy Choices
CA Notice
Terms of Service
© 2026 Versant Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Versant Media Company.
Data is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.
Market Data Terms of Use and Disclaimers
Data also provided by
This site is now part of Versant. By continuing, you agree to our Terms. You also acknowledge that our updated Privacy Policy applies, including your existing data. For info on your data rights, click “Your Privacy Choices” or see “Your Rights” in our Privacy Policy.
We and our partners also use tools on this site to provide the services, personalize your experience, and for analytics, marketing, and advertising. If you previously opted out of selling, sharing, or targeted advertising on this site, you will need to update your Privacy Choice.
Your Privacy Choices Continue