OpenAI Tests Sponsored AI Agents in ChatGPT Ads
By
PYMNTS
|
September 16, 2026
|
Listen to Article
Listen
OpenAI is testing business-sponsored artificial intelligence agents that will have conversations with people who click on an ad in ChatGPT , the company said in a Wednesday (Sept. 16) blog post .
Get the Full Story
Complete the form to unlock this article and enjoy unlimited free access to all PYMNTS content — no additional logins required.
yes Subscribe to our daily newsletter, PYMNTS Today.
By completing this form, you agree to receive marketing communications from PYMNTS and to the sharing of your information with our sponsor, if applicable, in accordance with our Privacy Policy and Terms and Conditions .
Δ
These Sponsored Agents are being tested with select advertisers in the United States, and their conversations will be separate from the original conversation in ChatGPT and from ChatGPT’s independent answers, according to the post.
This new experience is designed to make it easier for users to learn about products and services and to enable businesses to help interested customers explore their offerings, per the post.
We’d love to be your preferred source for news .
Please add us to your preferred sources list so our news, data and interviews show up in your feed. Thanks!
Add as Preferred Source
“Sponsored Agents give users the option to go deeper,” OpenAI said in the post. “After seeing a relevant ad, a user can choose to start a clearly labeled conversation with a business-sponsored agent in ChatGPT. The user can explain what matters to them, ask follow-up questions and follow a link to the business’s website when they’re ready to take the next step.”
This is one of several new AI-powered experiences OpenAI is rolling out to support its ad platform, according to the post.
OpenAI is also making it easier for businesses to create ads by writing prompts in ChatGPT Work, adding new AI creative tools to Ads Manager, and bringing ChatGPT into other tools used by businesses via integrations with HubSpot and Shopify , per the post.
“As people increasingly turn to AI to discover products, compare options and make decisions, we’re creating new ways for people and businesses to connect,” OpenAI said in the post. “That means reimagining both sides of advertising: how people engage with businesses in an AI-native environment and how businesses use AI to create and manage their ads.”
OpenAI said in January that it was bringing ads to ChatGPT in the United States and would begin testing them within weeks.
By Aug. 31, OpenAI said its ChatGPT Ads business had reached $1 billion in annualized revenue run rate.
“The platform is now used by tens of thousands of advertisers and continues to expand globally,” OpenAI said at the time in a press release. “Starting later today, advertisers can purchase ChatGPT ads directly via Ads Manager across India, Europe, the Middle East and North Africa.”
Recommended
Stripe to Buy Parafin to Scale Embedded Finance Across 18,000 Platforms
Pentagon Recordkeeping Unit Alerts 3 Million After 10-Month Data Breach
WEX Expands AI Capabilities to Fast-Track Healthcare Reimbursements
Treasury and Education Departments Launch Portal to Ease Student Debt Rehabilitation
See More In:
Agentic AI , AI , AI Agents , ChatGPT , News , OpenAI , PYMNTS News , What's Hot
Trending News
Stripe to Buy Parafin to Scale Embedded Finance Across 18,000 Platforms
Pentagon Recordkeeping Unit Alerts 3 Million After 10-Month Data Breach
WEX Expands AI Capabilities to Fast-Track Healthcare Reimbursements
The Big Story
As AI Assistants Fight Over Shoppers, Infrastructure Gets Paid Either Way.
Featured News
AI Giants Sign Safety Pact With No Teeth
Relay Raises $36 Million to Turn the Frontline Radio Into an AI Assistant
Banks Rethink Identity Checks as AI Fakes Voices and Faces
A Half Point Can Reveal the Real Cost of a Debit Upgrade
AI’s Payments Breakthrough Will Be Knowing When Not to Pay
Anthropic’s IPO Filing Puts a $518 Billion Price Tag on AI Ambition
Kalshi’s Sports Bets Hit Another Legal Wall
Subscribe
Get PYMNTS Today, AI, B2B and more.
CONTINUE
View all newsletters.
Strategic B2B Partnerships
Partner With PYMNTS
Own the conversation. Drive demand.
Start a Conversation &rarr;