DONATE NOW
News ▾
Dispatches ▾
Commentary ▾
Features ▾
Topics
Rule of Law ▾
About ▾
Donate ▾
News
Rudolph.A.furtado, CC0, via Wikimedia Commons
Judge approves record $1.5 billion AI copyright settlement involving Anthropic
Andrew Bialek | U. Pittsburgh School of Law, US
JULY 22, 2026 02:11:40 PM
The US District Court for the Northern District of California on Monday gave its final approval to a $1.5 billion settlement in the Bartz v. Anthropic case, in which it was alleged that Anthropic had used pirated books as material to train its Claude AI platform.
The settlement came after a year in the courts, a judge retiring, and preliminary approval of the settlement in September. Preliminary approval came after a ruling on the training. Prior to the class action lawsuit being certified, Judge William Alsup held that AI companies can use legally purchased books for training, not illegal ones. In commenting on the case, Judge Alsup stated: “Anthropic had no entitlement to use pirated copies for a central library. Creating a permanent, general-purpose library was not itself a fair use.”
In distinguishing the purchased books from the pirated ones, Judge Alsup summarized that the purchased, printed books being digitized for the central library were a means of saving space. The books themselves were still purchased, and it was just a matter of storage. Pirated books, on the other hand, Judge Alsup stated, “could have [been] purchased or otherwise accessed lawfully.” He ruled that the payout will be $3,000 per book, covering over 400,000 books.
The June ruling was hailed as a major victory for the AI industry as it allowed the use of legally acquired books, and that assessment largely still stands. At the same time, the accompanying $1.5 billion copyright settlement is the world’s largest copyright settlement to date.
This is the first settlement out of dozens of AI copyright suits still working their way through the court system. As for the settlement itself, Judge Araceli Martínez-Olguín rejected objections that the settlement price was too low. Quoting the preliminary approval, Judge Martínez-Olguín highlighted that the settlement brings value and closure. Additionally, Anthropic’s attorneys highlighted that over 91 percent of relevant authors claimed their payouts.
The attorneys’ fees portion of the settlement was over $100 million. Judge Martínez-Olguín acknowledged this, remarking that “the class received quality representation from experienced attorneys.” This historic decision signals the end of the unregulated “Wild West” era of AI training data, effectively forcing tech giants to exercise more responsibility in building their models.
GET OUR DAILY DIGEST
Email Address
Subscribe Key:
SUBSCRIBE
LATEST DISPATCHES
Pakistan dispatch: Supreme Court defers jailed former PM’s medical case amid jurisdictional dispute
Taiwan dispatch: motion for retrial filed over 2000 execution amid miscarriage of justice concerns
LATEST COMMENTARY
When Court Interpretation Failed in Taiwan, I Turned to a Chatbot
by Ross Cline | KH
Can the US Keep a Diplomat Out of the UN?
by Matthew R. Morley | Morley & Associates | US | Russia
LATEST FEATURES
‘Accountability Is Deferred Rather Than Delivered’ — Conflict Resolution Scholar Johannes Langer on Mediation, Amnesty, and the Limits of the ICC
‘Genocide denial is often a state project’ — Iva Vukušić on Srebrenica and the politics of memory
THIS DAY @ LAW
British Mandate for Palestine goes into effect
The League of Nations Mandate for Palestine went into effect on September 29, 1923, granting the United Kingdom administrative control of Palestine. It also directed the UK to facilitate the creation of a Jewish state in the region pursuant to the 1917 Balfour Declaration. Learn more about the British Mandate for Palestine.
First Congressional invocation of War Powers Act
On September 29, 1983, Congress invoked the War Powers Act for the first time, authorizing President Ronald Reagan to keep US Marines in Lebanon for another 18 months.
Tweleve Europe Nations create CERN
On September 29, 1954, twelve European nations signed a convention, creating the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN). The laboratory was later constructed in Geneva, Switzerland. Learn more about the history of CERN.
HOME ATTRIBUTIONS DISCLAIMER PRIVACY POLICY CONTACT US
Copyright © 2026, JURIST Legal News & Research Services, Inc.
JURISTnews is a collaboration with the University of Pittsburgh