NEWS
[UPDATED] News: Anthropic (Briefly) Removes Claude Code From $20-A-Month "Pro" Subscription Plan For New Users
ED ZITRON
APR 21, 2026
3 MIN READ
Subscribe to Ed Zitron's Where's Your Ed At
Get the free version of my newsletter. No spam ever, unsubscribe anytime.
Subscribe
Already a member? Sign in
Executive Summary:
In the later afternoon of April 21 2026, Anthropic removed access to Claude Code for its $20-a-month "Pro" Plans on various pricing pages.
Current Pro users appeared to still have access via the Claude web app.
Claude Code support documents, for a brief period of time, exclusively referred to accessing Claude Code via "your Max Plan," after previously saying you could access "with your Pro or Max Plan."
On this was raised on Twitter, Anthropic Head of Growth Amol Avasare claimed that this was a "small test of 2% of new prosumer signups."
When pressed as to why support documents were changed and why the website consistently showed users that Pro subscribers weren't offered Claude Code, Avasare did not respond.
At an unknown time, Anthropic reversed the changes to the website and support documentation.
This piece remains as a record of what happened, as I do not believe that this is the last time that Anthropic makes changes in this manner.
Per Avasare, "...[Anthropic] made small adjustments along the way (weekly caps, tighter limits at peak), but usage has changed a lot and our current plans weren't built for this." This suggests that changes are to come for all subscription tiers, as he also added that Claude's Max plan was released before Claude Code and Claude Cowork, and "...designed for heavy chat usage, that's it."
The following exists as a record of what happened previously, please see above for the full story.
In developing news, Anthropic appears to have removed access to AI coding tool Claude Code from its $20-a-month "Pro" accounts. This is likely another cost-cutting move that follows a recent change (per The Information) that forced enterprise users to pay on a per-million-token based rate rather than having rate limits that were, based on researchers' findings, often much higher than the cost of the subscription.
Update: Anthropic's Amol Avasare claims that it is "...running a small test on ~2% of new prosumer signups. Existing Pro and Max subscribers aren't affected." This does not really make sense given the fact that all support documents and the Claude website reflect that Pro users do not have access to Claude Code.
I am waiting for further comment.
Previously, users were able to access Claude using their Pro subscriptions via a command-line interface and both the web and desktop Claude apps. Users were, instead of paying on a per-million-token basis, allowed to use their subscription to access Claude Code, but will likely now have to pay for API access.
Anthropic's Claude Code support documents (as recently as this April 10th archived page) previously read "Using Claude Code with your Pro or Max plan." The page now reads "Using Claude Code with your Max plan."
Pricing on Anthropic's website reflects the removal of Claude Code on both mobile and desktop.
Some Pro users report that they are still able to access Claude Code via the web app and Command-Line Interface.
It is unclear at this time whether this change is retroactive or for new Pro subscribers, or whether Anthropic intends to entirely remove access to Claude Code (without paying for API tokens) from every Pro customer.
Subscribe to Ed Zitron's Where's Your Ed At
Get on the free list. No spam ever, unsubscribe anytime.
Subscribe
Already a member? Sign in
I have requested a comment from Anthropic, and will update this piece when I receive it, or if Anthropic confirms this move otherwise.
If you liked this news hit and want to support my independent reporting and analysis, why not subscribe to my premium newsletter?
It’s $70 a year, or $7 a month, and in return you get a weekly newsletter that’s usually anywhere from 5,000 to 18,000 words, including vast, detailed analyses of NVIDIA, Anthropic and OpenAI’s finances, and the AI bubble writ large. I recently put out the timely and important Hater’s Guide To The SaaSpocalypse, another on How AI Isn't Too Big To Fail, a deep (17,500 word) Hater’s Guide To OpenAI, and just last week put out the massive Hater’s Guide To Private Credit.
Subscribing to premium is both great value and makes it possible to write these large, deeply-researched free pieces every week.
Subscribe to Ed Zitron's Where's Your Ed At
Get the free version of my newsletter. No spam ever, unsubscribe anytime.
Subscribe
Already a member? Sign in
SHARE
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Ed Zitron
View all
MORE LIKE THIS
Four Horsemen of the AIpocalypse
If you liked this piece, please subscribe to my premium newsletter. It’s $70 a year, or $7 a month, and in return you get a weekly newsletter that’s...
OpenAI Projects ChatGPT Plus subscriptions to drop by 80% from 44 Million in 2025 to 9 Million In 2026, Made Up Using Cheaper Subscriptions (Somehow)
Executive Summary: * The Information reports that OpenAI projects that its $20-a-month ChatGPT Plus subscriptions will decrease from 44 Million...
[Updated] Exclusive: Microsoft Moving All GitHub Copilot Subscribers To Token-Based Billing In June
Executive Summary: * Internal documents reveal Microsoft’s planned rollout for token-based billing for all GitHub Copilot customers starting in June...
Anthropic's "Profitability" Swindle
Yesterday, the Wall Street Journal ran a story about how Anthropic is “about to have its first profitable quarter,” specifically an operating profit,...
Exclusive: Microsoft To Shift GitHub Copilot Users To Token-Based Billing, Tighten Rate Limits
Executive Summary: * Internal documents reveal that Microsoft plans to temporarily suspend individual account signups to its GitHub Copilot coding...
News: Microsoft Disclosures Suggest OpenAI Sales Account For Around 70% Of FY26 AI Revenue, More Than 7% of FY26 Revenue
Executive Summary: * Microsoft disclosures and Bloomberg analyses show that OpenAI's compute spend and revenue share accounted for 70% or more of...
EXPLORE
There Is No AI Revolution
Soundtrack: Mack Glocky - Chasing Cars Last week, I spent a great deal of time and words framing the generative AI industry as a cynical con where...
The Rot Economy
At the center of everything I’ve written for the last few months (if not the last few years), sits a cancerous problem with the fabric of how capital...
The Man Who Killed Google Search
Wanna listen to this story instead? Check out this week's Better Offline podcast, "The Man That Destroyed Google Search," available on Apple Podcasts...
Make Fun Of Them
Have you ever heard Sam Altman speak? I’m serious, have you ever heard this man say words from his mouth? Here is but one of the trenchant insights...
Requiem for Raghavan
Last week, Prabhakar Raghavan was relieved of duty as Senior Vice President of Search, becoming Google's "Chief Technologist." An important rule to...
Premium: How Has AI Changed The Economy?
This week, the Wall Street Journal ran an alarming illustration of AI’s potential share of GDP that I’d argue did more to muddy the waters than...
COMMENTS
MORE FROM ED ZITRON'S WHERE'S YOUR ED AT
NEWS
News: Microsoft Disclosures Suggest OpenAI Sales Account For Around 70% Of FY26 AI Revenue, More Than 7% of FY26 Revenue
Executive Summary: * Microsoft disclosures and Bloomberg analyses show that OpenAI's compute spend and revenue share accounted for 70%
ED ZITRON
AUG 5, 2026
2 MIN READ
NEWS
News: OpenAI Had A Negative 122% Non-GAAP Operating Margin In Q1 2026, and ChatGPT Growth Has Stalled
Executive Summary: * The Information reports that OpenAI generated $5.7bn in revenue for the first quarter of 2026 based on
ED ZITRON
MAY 22, 2026
4 MIN READ
NEWS
OpenAI Projects ChatGPT Plus subscriptions to drop by 80% from 44 Million in 2025 to 9 Million In 2026, Made Up Using Cheaper Subscriptions (Somehow)
Executive Summary: * The Information reports that OpenAI projects that its $20-a-month ChatGPT Plus subscriptions will decrease from 44
ED ZITRON
APR 28, 2026
2 MIN READ