Sam Altman leaving OpenAI after board says he was ‘not consistently candid in his communications’
BY TAYLOR SOPER on Nov 17, 2023 at 1:16 pm
Share
OpenAI CTO Mira Murati and CEO Sam Altman speak with reporters at OpenAI DevDay in San Francisco earlier this month. The company announced Friday that Altman is leaving the company. (GeekWire Photo / Todd Bishop)
Updated at 4:21 p.m. with news of Greg Brockman’s resignation.
Sam Altman, one of the most influential leaders in the burgeoning AI industry, is leaving OpenAI, the company he helped start in 2015 and led as CEO.
The surprise news, announced Friday afternoon, comes just a few weeks after Altman led OpenAI’s first developer day, sharing the stage with Satya Nadella, CEO of Microsoft, a key OpenAI partner that has poured billions into the company.
In a statement, OpenAI said Altman “was not consistently candid in his communications with the board, hindering its ability to exercise its responsibilities.”
“The board no longer has confidence in his ability to continue leading OpenAI,” the company said.
OpenAI CTO Mira Murati will serve as interim CEO.
Greg Brockman, who helped start the company with Altman, is stepping down as chairman of the board. OpenAI initially said that Brockman would remain in his role at OpenAI, reporting to the CEO. However, late Friday, Brockman said he was leaving the company “after learning today’s news.” Update: Brockman later tweeted Friday that he and Altman were “shocked and saddened by what the board did today.”
“We are grateful for Sam’s many contributions to the founding and growth of OpenAI,” the company said. “At the same time, we believe new leadership is necessary as we move forward.”
Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella, right, on stage with Altman at OpenAI Dev Day in San Francisco on Nov. 9. (GeekWire Photo / Todd Bishop)
OpenAI partners closely with Redmond, Wash.-based Microsoft, powering a popular Azure OpenAI service for the company’s cloud platform and contributing to the company’s AI search and productivity apps.
Microsoft invested an initial $1 billion in OpenAI in 2019 and added another $10 billion in January of this year.
Microsoft was “blindsided” by the news of Altman’s departure, according to Axios.
“We have a long-term partnership with OpenAI and Microsoft remains committed to Mira and their team as we bring this next era of AI to our customers,” a Microsoft spokesperson said in a statement to GeekWire.
In a tweet, Nadella said “we have a long-term agreement with OpenAI with full access to everything we need to deliver on our innovation agenda and an exciting product roadmap; and remain committed to our partnership, and to Mira and the team.”
OpenAI started as a nonprofit but later created a for-profit subsidiary buoyed by the release of ChatGPT last year and the partnership with Microsoft.
Matt McIlwain, managing director at Madrona Venture Group, told CNBC that the combination of Altman’s departure and Brockman getting booted from the chairman role — and not being appointed as CEO — “is intriguing to say the least at a corporate level.”
At its developer event earlier this month, OpenAI is introduced a way for individual ChatGPT users to create customized versions of its popular AI chatbot, personalized for their own use and for sharing with others.
The personal chatbots, dubbed “GPTs,” are the latest move by the company to democratize its artificial intelligence technology, a year after ChatGPT opened the eyes of the industry and the world to the potential of large language models and increasingly sophisticated forms of generative AI.
Some comments from around the internet following the news of Altman’s departure:
https://twitter.com/karaswisher/status/1725630569956999374
Taylor Soper worked at GeekWire for more than 13 years as reporter, managing editor and editor, reporting on Seattle-area startups, Microsoft, Amazon, and the regional technology and investing scene. A native of Portland, Ore., and graduate of the University of Washington, he is now Director of AI House at AI2 Incubator. Follow him on LinkedIn.
Share
Previous Story
Tech Moves: Icertis exec joins Zenoti; Brex names new president; Nautilus Biotechnology hires VP
Next Story
Sam Altman’s ouster puts a new twist into OpenAI’s complicated relationship with Microsoft
Filed Under: Tech Tagged With: OpenAI • Sam Altman
Latest Stories
‘I’m not sure we’d make the same decision’: A rocket maker’s reality check for the Seattle region
‘Losing a piece of my life’: As Amazon’s Mechanical Turk shuts down, gig workers recall the HITs
Meadow AI lands $7M to scale ‘digital secret shopper’ platform for physical retailers and restaurants
Climate Week NYC: Amazon’s Kara Hurst on AI data centers; Earthshot’s Jason Knauf on climate optimism
Washington governor sets up space council to boost business ventures targeting the final frontier
Seattle-based sales tech company Outreach to move HQ to Adobe’s campus in Fremont neighborhood
Seattle outranks major global cities to land at No. 4 in report that cites economy, quality of life, and more
Nimbus Aerospace tests quarter-scale prototype in Oregon as hybrid-electric race ramps up
‘It’s not a lost cause’: Seattle Aquarium CEO Meg McCann on saving the ocean one visitor at a time
An ethicist’s take: What philosophy teaches us about the limits we should be setting on AI agents
Read All Stories
GeekWire Newsletters
Subscribe to GeekWire's free newsletters to catch every headline
Email address
Subscribe
Send Us a Tip
Have a scoop that you'd like GeekWire to cover? Let us know.
Send Us a Tip
Related Stories
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman’s stake in Helion Energy draws scrutiny in Musk trial and on Capitol Hill
Amazon MGM Studios drops film about Sam Altman months after tech giant’s $50B OpenAI deal
Musk v. Altman: Satya Nadella was worried about Microsoft being ‘the next IBM’ in OpenAI deal
Inside the courthouse as Elon Musk’s suit against OpenAI and Microsoft goes to trial
Most Popular on GeekWire
Internal memos: Microsoft shakes up communications as Nadella makes a push to build in public
Amazon blocks Meta’s Muse AI assistant in new standoff over agentic shopping
Microsoft unveils all-in-one Copilot app, taking on Anthropic and OpenAI in new push to boost adoption
Microsoft cuts hundreds more jobs, shifts next ‘Halo’ game to Activision in Xbox overhaul
Job Listings on GeekWork
Senior Deployment Engineer
Karat
Director, Product Marketing
SeekOut
Senior TPM, Integrations & Partner Engineering
BRINC
Systems Reliability Engineer
Local Public
Senior RF Antenna Engineer
Kymeta
Principal Software Engineer | Data Science
ExtraHop
Mission Success Engineer
Overland AI
Find more jobs on GeekWork. Employers, post a job here.