In Brief
Posted:
10:44 AM PST · December 2, 2024
Image Credits: JASON REDMOND/AFP / Getty Images
•
• Natasha Lomas
Ads might be coming to ChatGPT — despite Sam Altman not being a fan
OpenAI is toying with a move into ads, per the Financial Times . CFO Sarah Friar told the newspaper it’s weighing an ads business model, with plans to be “thoughtful” about when and where ads appear. In a follow-on statement, Friar stressed it has “no active plans to pursue advertising,” but it seems clear the idea is on the table. (The FT’s reporting highlighted a recent high-profile ad hire: Shivakumar Venkataraman, formerly of Google.)
The ChatGPT maker has so far relied on subscriptions to support development of its generative AI tools. But the cost of making and serving these models is eye-wateringly high, and there are only so many billions of dollars that investors may be willing to fork into the fire.
Still, the move looks uncomfortable for OpenAI founder Sam Altman. In a recent fireside chat at Harvard Business School , after being asked if the company might adopt ads to broaden access options, he said it would be a “last resort … I’m not saying OpenAI would never consider ads, but I don’t like them in general, and I think that ads-plus-AI is sort of uniquely unsettling to me.”
Topics
AI , ChatGPT , chatgpt ads , In Brief , sam altman , United States
October 13 – 15
San Francisco
Get 50% off a second pass
The Disrupt experience is meant to be shared. Get your pass and bring a colleague, partner, or peer at 50% off. Cover more ground by making connections, building momentum, and discovering what’s next in the startup ecosystem.
BOOK NOW
Newsletters
See More
Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news
TechCrunch Daily News
Every weekday and Sunday, you can get the best of TechCrunch’s coverage.
TechCrunch Mobility
TechCrunch Mobility is your destination for transportation news and insight.
Startups Weekly
Startups are the core of TechCrunch, so get our best coverage delivered weekly.
StrictlyVC
Provides movers and shakers with the info they need to start their day.
No newsletters selected.
Subscribe
By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice .
Related
• class="wp-block-post post-3171280 post type-post status-publish format-standard has-post-thumbnail hentry category-artificial-intelligence tag-ai tag-chatgpt tag-microsoft tag-openai tag-salesforce">
AI
OpenAI takes on Microsoft with the launch of what feels a whole lot like ChatGPT’s own office suite
• Lucas Ropek
1 hour ago
• class="wp-block-post post-3171312 post type-post status-publish format-standard has-post-thumbnail hentry category-artificial-intelligence category-apps tag-apps tag-plugins tag-openai tag-chatgpt">
AI
OpenAI expands ChatGPT’s plugins with app-like interfaces and automations
• Sarah Perez
2 hours ago
• class="wp-block-post post-3170334 post type-post status-publish format-standard has-post-thumbnail hentry category-artificial-intelligence tag-equity-podcast tag-meta">
AI
Can Muse overcome Meta’s trust issues?
• Anthony Ha
2 days ago
Latest in AI
• class="wp-block-post post-3171020 post type-post status-publish format-standard has-post-thumbnail hentry category-tc category-artificial-intelligence tag-nvidia tag-exclusive tag-openai">
AI
Here’s why OpenAI is absent from Nvidia’s industry-wide effort to end rogue AI agents
• Julie Bort
17 minutes ago
• class="wp-block-post post-3171280 post type-post status-publish format-standard has-post-thumbnail hentry category-artificial-intelligence tag-ai tag-chatgpt tag-microsoft tag-openai tag-salesforce">
AI
OpenAI takes on Microsoft with the launch of what feels a whole lot like ChatGPT’s own office suite
• Lucas Ropek
1 hour ago
• class="wp-block-post post-3171437 post type-post status-publish format-standard has-post-thumbnail hentry category-artificial-intelligence category-apps tag-ai tag-wabi">
AI
AI-powered app maker Wabi pivots to a messaging experience
• Sarah Perez
2 hours ago