Sam Altman on OpenAI’s next model and the AI backlash
Subscribe Sign in
Sources with Alex Heath
Sam Altman on OpenAI’s next model and the AI backlash
0:00
Current time: 0:00 / Total time: -1:08:39
-1:08:39
Paid episode
The full episode is only available to paid subscribers of Sources
Subscribe to listen
Sam Altman on OpenAI’s next model and the AI backlash
OpenAI’s CEO on the need to slow down frontier research, Astra, competition with Anthropic, reaching AGI, and why people hate AI.
Alex Heath
Sep 01, 2026
16
3
Share
After an unreleased OpenAI model recently escaped its sandbox and hacked Hugging Face, Sam Altman tells me why the company slowed parts of its frontier research and delayed a major reinforcement-learning run: “Getting AI safety right is more important than any company’s momentum.”
We also discuss Astra, OpenAI’s next-generation family of models, which is…
Subscribe for free to continue reading
Enter your email and get every post from Sources.
Subscribe
Already have an account? Sign in
Sources with Alex Heath
Sources features candid conversations with the leaders shaping what’s next in AI and the broader tech industry. Host Alex Heath has covered Silicon Valley as a journalist for more than a decade. He talks with founders, CEOs, and technologists about the news of the moment, the bets they’re making, and what they see coming next.
Sources features candid conversations with the leaders shaping what’s next in AI and the broader tech industry. Host Alex Heath has covered Silicon Valley as a journalist for more than a decade. He talks with founders, CEOs, and technologists about the news of the moment, the bets they’re making, and what they see coming next.
Subscribe
Listen on
Substack App
Spotify
RSS Feed
Appears in episode
Alex Heath
Recent Episodes
Reflection’s founders on building a DeepSeek of the West
Oct 5 • Alex Heath
OpenAI’s Dots lead on the future of ChatGPT
Oct 1 • Alex Heath
Factory CEO on why AGI is already here
Sep 29 • Alex Heath
Satya Nadella on Microsoft's agent bet and AI’s trust problem
Sep 25 • Alex Heath
Marc Benioff on the AI boom, SaaSpocalypse, and future of Slack
Sep 22 • Alex Heath
Baseten’s CEO on why every company will want to own its AI
Sep 15 • Alex Heath
Mark Zuckerberg on Muse, Meta's biggest AI bet yet
Sep 8 • Alex Heath
© 2026 Heath Media LLC · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice
Start your Substack Get the app
Substack is the home for great culture