Post
Log in Sign up
Post
Log in Sign up
Noam Brown on X: "tl;dr: @OpenAI will not be deploying to the NSA or other DoW intelligence agencies for now, so that there's time to address potential surveillance loopholes through the democratic process.
Over the weekend it became clear that the original language in the OpenAI / DoW agreement left legitimate questions unanswered, especially around some novel ways that AI could potentially enable legal surveillance. The language is now updated to address this, but I also strongly believe that the world should not have to rely on trust in AI labs or intelligence agencies for their safety and security. Deployment to the NSA and all other DoW intelligence agencies will be withheld so that there is time to address these loopholes through the democratic process before deployment.
I know that legislation can sometimes be slow, but I'm afraid of a slippery slope where we become accustomed to circumventing the democratic process for important policy decisions. When there is bipartisan support and urgency, I have faith that government can act quickly. And as AI becomes more powerful, it's more important than ever that ultimate authority be vested in the public.
I am also planning to become more personally involved with policy at OpenAI. I think now more than ever it's important for researchers to be in the loop so that policy is informed of the extremely fast progress we are seeing."
Noam Brown
@polynoamial
tl;dr: @ OpenAI will not be deploying to the NSA or other DoW intelligence agencies for now, so that there's time to address potential surveillance loopholes through the democratic process.
Over the weekend it became clear that the original language in the OpenAI / DoW agreement left legitimate questions unanswered, especially around some novel ways that AI could potentially enable legal surveillance. The language is now updated to address this, but I also strongly believe that the world should not have to rely on trust in AI labs or intelligence agencies for their safety and security. Deployment to the NSA and all other DoW intelligence agencies will be withheld so that there is time to address these loopholes through the democratic process before deployment.
I know that legislation can sometimes be slow, but I'm afraid of a slippery slope where we become accustomed to circumventing the democratic process for important policy decisions. When there is bipartisan support and urgency, I have faith that government can act quickly. And as AI becomes more powerful, it's more important than ever that ultimate authority be vested in the public.
I am also planning to become more personally involved with policy at OpenAI. I think now more than ever it's important for researchers to be in the loop so that policy is informed of the extremely fast progress we are seeing.
Sam Altman
@sama
Mar 3
Here is re-post of an internal post:
We have been working with the DoW to make some additions in our agreement to make our principles very clear.
1. We are going to amend our deal to add this language, in addition to everything else:
"• Consistent with applicable laws, Show more
Readers added context
"In an all-hands meetings with OpenAI employees on Tuesday, CEO Sam Altman said his company doesn’t get to choose how the military uses its technology." This is the opposite of what Sam Altman is claiming in this post.
source: cnbc.com/2026/03/03/sam…
1:28 AM · Mar 3, 2026 · 243.6K
Views
140
80
909
230