Tech-gadgets
Reddit sues AI firm Anthropic for ‘illegally’ scraping millions of posts to train chatbot Claude
Anthropic was said to have been training its models on Reddit content since at least December 2021. ― Reuters pic
Stay updated on the latest news and insights. Subscribe to our newsletter here
Earn a fixed rate of up to 4.2%* p.a. for 210 days with Versa Save ! Plus, enjoy an additional FREE RM10 when you sign up using code VERSAMM10 with a min. cash-in of RM100 today. T&Cs apply.
Make Malay Mail your preferred source on Google Giving you news that matter to Malaysians. Make Malay Mail your preferred source when you search for news on Google.
First Published: Thursday, 05 Jun 2025 9:19 AM MYT
× Subscribe to Newsletter
Subscribe
SAN FRANCISCO, June 5 — Social media outlet Reddit filed a lawsuit yesterday against artificial intelligence company Anthropic, accusing the startup of illegally scraping millions of user comments to train its Claude chatbot without permission or compensation.
The lawsuit in a California state court represents the latest front in the growing battle between content providers and AI companies over the use of data to train increasingly sophisticated language models that power the generative AI revolution.
Anthropic, valued at US$61.5 billion (RM260 billion) and heavily backed by Amazon, was founded in 2021 by former executives from OpenAI, the creator of ChatGPT.
The company, known for its Claude chatbot and AI models, positions itself as focused on AI safety and responsible development.
“This case is about the two faces of Anthropic: the public face that attempts to ingratiate itself into the consumer’s consciousness with claims of righteousness and respect for boundaries and the law, and the private face that ignores any rules that interfere with its attempts to further line its pockets,” the suit said.
According to the complaint, Anthropic has been training its models on Reddit content since at least December 2021, with CEO Dario Amodei co-authoring research papers that specifically identified high-quality content for data training.
The lawsuit alleges that despite Anthropic’s public claims that it had blocked its bots from accessing Reddit, the company’s automated systems continued to harvest Reddit’s servers more than 100,000 times in subsequent months.
Reddit is seeking monetary damages and a court injunction to force Anthropic to comply with its user agreement terms. The company has requested a jury trial.
In an email to AFP, Anthropic said “We disagree with Reddit’s claims and will defend ourselves vigorously.”
Reddit has entered into licensing agreements with other AI giants including Google and OpenAI, which allow those companies to use Reddit content under terms that protect user privacy and provide compensation to the platform.
Those deals have helped lift Reddit’s share price since it went public in 2024.
Reddit shares closed up more than six percent on Wednesday following news of the lawsuit.
Musicians, book authors, visual artists and news publications have sued the various AI companies that used their data without permission or payment.
AI companies generally defend their practices by claiming fair use, arguing that training AI on large datasets fundamentally changes the original content and is necessary for innovation.
Though most of these lawsuits are still in early stages, their outcomes could have a profound effect on the shape of the AI industry. — AFP
You May Also Like
Related Articles
Tech-gadgets / 3 h ago
OpenAI wants ChatGPT to be the app store for AI — and it’s bringing Adobe along
Tech-gadgets / 5 h ago
OpenAI launches cheaper GPT-6.1 Sol after scrapping troubled Astra upgrade
Tech-gadgets / 5 h ago
Spam isn’t just in your email: How a rogue calendar invite could disrupt your workday
Just IN
9 m ago
‘We are always open’: BN still negotiating political cooperation, says Asyraf Wajdi
22 m ago
College student fails to strike out murder charge over Jalan Ampang collision that killed couple
28 m ago
Bidor petrol station shooting: Man hospitalised with bullet wound to shoulder