Enterprise privacy at OpenAI
Trust and privacy are at the core of our mission at OpenAI. We’re committed to privacy and security for ChatGPT Team, ChatGPT Enterprise, and our API Platform, which includes providing you with ownership and control over your inputs and outputs from these services (“business data”).
Our commitments
Ownership: You own and control your data
Loading...
Control: You decide who has access
Loading...
Security: Comprehensive compliance
Loading...
General FAQ
How can I use OpenAI technology in my business?
The easiest way to get started with OpenAI is to deploy ChatGPT Team or ChatGPT Enterprise for your employees. It’s simple to use and allows anyone in your organization to be productive with AI. If your engineering teams wish to build custom solutions using our technology, try our API Platform (opens in a new window) .
Does OpenAI train its models on my business data?
By default, we do not use your business data for training our models. If you have explicitly opted in to share your data with us (for example, through feedback (opens in a new window) ) to improve our services, then we may use the shared data to train our models.
What if I use GPTs in ChatGPT Enterprise or ChatGPT Team?
Your end users can build and share GPTs internally with each other within your workspace. The same commitments we provide for ChatGPT Enterprise and ChatGPT Team also apply to your use of GPTs within those workspaces. Note that if your workspace admins enable GPTs to be shareable with the public, any GPTs that your users choose to publish externally may be subject to additional review. Learn more about GPTs .
Who owns inputs and outputs?
As between you and OpenAI: you retain all rights to the inputs you provide to our services and you own any output you rightfully receive from our services to the extent permitted by law. We only receive rights in input and output necessary to provide you with our services, comply with applicable law, and enforce our policies.
How does OpenAI ensure data security?
OpenAI encrypts all data at rest (AES-256) and in transit (TLS 1.2+), and uses strict access controls to limit who can access data. Our security team has an on-call rotation that has 24/7/365 coverage and is paged in case of any potential security incident. We offer a Bug Bounty Program for responsible disclosure of vulnerabilities discovered on our platform and products. Please visit our Security Portal (opens in a new window) for more details.
Can OpenAI support my compliance with GDPR and other privacy laws?
Yes, we are able to execute a Data Processing Addendum (DPA) with customers for their use of ChatGPT Team, ChatGPT Enterprise, and the API in support of their compliance with GDPR and other privacy laws. Please complete our DPA form (opens in a new window) to execute a DPA with OpenAI.
Does OpenAI review my business data?
We may run any business data submitted to OpenAI’s services through automated content classifiers and safety tools, including to better understand how our services are used. The classifications created are metadata about the business data but do not contain any of the business data itself. Business data is only subject to human review as described below on a service-by-service basis.
ChatGPT Enterprise FAQ
What is ChatGPT Enterprise?
Built for businesses, ChatGPT Enterprise offers organizations the ability to use ChatGPT with controls, deployment tools, and speed required to make your entire organization more productive. Learn more about ChatGPT Enterprise .
Who can view conversations and chat history in ChatGPT Enterprise?
Within your organization, end users can view their own conversations. Your organization has control over workspaces, and workspace admins can access an audit log of conversations and GPTs through the Enterprise Compliance API (opens in a new window) . Authorized OpenAI employees will only ever access your conversations for the purposes of resolving incidents, recovering end user conversations with your explicit permission, or where required by applicable law.
What compliance standards does ChatGPT Enterprise meet?
ChatGPT Enterprise has been audited and certified for SOC 2 Type 2 compliance. Read more in our Security Portal (opens in a new window) .
What is OpenAI’s policy on data retention for ChatGPT Enterprise?
Your workspace admins control how long your data is retained. Any deleted conversations are removed from our systems within 30 days, unless we are legally required to retain them. Note that retention enables features like conversation history, and shorter retention periods may compromise product experience.
ChatGPT Team FAQ
What is ChatGPT Team?
Built for teams and small businesses, ChatGPT Team offers collaborative tools and self-serve access to the power of ChatGPT in a dedicated workspace for your team. Learn more about ChatGPT Team .
Who can view conversations and chat history in ChatGPT Team?
Within your organization, only end users can view their conversations. Workspace admins have control over workspaces and access. Our access to conversations stored on our systems is limited to (1) authorized employees that require access for engineering support, investigating potential platform abuse, and legal compliance and (2) specialized third-party contractors who are bound by confidentiality and security obligations, solely to review for abuse and misuse.
What compliance standards does ChatGPT Team meet?
ChatGPT Team has been audited and certified for SOC 2 Type 2 compliance. Read more in our Security Portal (opens in a new window) .
What is OpenAI’s policy on data retention for ChatGPT Team?
Each of your end users controls whether their conversations are retained. Any deleted or unsaved conversations are removed from our systems within 30 days, unless we are legally required to retain them. Note that retention enables features like conversation history, and shorter retention periods may compromise product experience.
API Platform FAQ
What is the API Platform?
The OpenAI API Platform gives developers access to powerful models like GPT-4 and GPT-3.5 Turbo. You can create various applications and services, including fine-tuning models for specific tasks. Find more information in our Platform Docs (opens in a new window) .
What compliance standards does OpenAI’s API Platform adhere to?
Our API Platform has been audited and certified for SOC 2 Type 2 compliance. Read more in our Security Portal (opens in a new window) .
Can the API Platform be used with protected health information?
We are able to sign Business Associate Agreements (BAA) in support of customers’ compliance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). Please reach out (opens in a new window) if you require a BAA.
Can I fine-tune OpenAI models using my own data?
Yes, you can adapt certain models to specific tasks by fine-tuning them with your own prompt-completion pairs. Your fine-tuned models are for your use alone and never served to or shared with other customers or used to train other models. Data submitted to fine-tune a model is retained until the customer deletes the files.
How does OpenAI handle data retention and monitoring for API usage?
Except for certain endpoints listed in our platform documentation (opens in a new window) , OpenAI may securely retain API inputs and outputs for up to 30 days to provide the services and to identify abuse. After 30 days, API inputs and outputs are removed from our systems, unless we are legally required to retain them. You can also request zero data retention (ZDR) for eligible endpoints if you have a qualifying use-case. For details on data handling, visit our Platform Docs (opens in a new window) page.
Who can view stored API inputs, outputs, and fine-tuning data?
Our access to API business data stored on our systems is limited to (1) authorized employees that require access for engineering support, investigating potential platform abuse, and legal compliance and (2) specialized third-party contractors who are bound by confidentiality and security obligations, solely to review for abuse and misuse.
Model training FAQ
How does OpenAI train its models?
OpenAI trains its models in two stages. First, we learn from a large amount of data. Then, we use data from ChatGPT users and human trainers to make sure the outputs are safe and accurate and to improve their general capabilities. Learn more about our training process (opens in a new window) .
What sources of data are used for training OpenAI models?
OpenAI uses data from different places including public sources, licensed third-party data, and information created by human reviewers. We also use data from versions of ChatGPT and DALL·E for individuals. Data from ChatGPT Team, ChatGPT Enterprise, and the API Platform (after March 1, 2023) isn't used for training our models, unless you have explicitly opted in to share your data with us to improve the services.
