Anthropic’s newest AI model has arrived. But it’s pricier than the last generation, and unlike Anthropic’s other models, it can’t analyze images just yet.
Claude 3.5 Haiku, which Anthropic announced last month, matches or bests the performance of Anthropic’s flagship model, Claude 3 Opus, on specific benchmarks. Available through Anthropic’s API and a number of third-party platforms, including AWS Bedrock, Claude 3.5 Haiku is useful for coding suggestions, data extraction and labeling, and content moderation, Anthropic says.
Anthropic previously suggested that Claude 3.5 Haiku would cost the same as Claude 3 Haiku, its predecessor. Now it’s changing its tune.
“During final testing, Haiku surpassed Claude 3 Opus, our previous flagship model, on many benchmarks — at a fraction of the cost. As a result, we’ve increased pricing for Claude 3.5 Haiku to reflect its increase in intelligence,” Anthropic wrote in a post on X.
Pricing for Claude 3.5 Haiku starts at $1 per million input tokens (~750,000 words) and $5 per million output tokens. That’s versus 25 cents per million input tokens and $1.25 per million output tokens for Claude 3 Haiku — a 4x hike.
Claude 3.5 Haiku also isn’t launching with image analysis features, making it less capable in at least one respect compared to Claude 3 Haiku. Alex Albert, head of developer relations at Anthropic, said on X that Claude 3 Haiku will remain available “for users requiring maximum cost-efficiency and image processing.”
Granted, Claude 3.5 Haiku can output longer chunks of text than Claude 3 Haiku, and the model has a more recent knowledge cutoff (meaning it can reference more recent events). Still, it’s rare for an AI vendor to raise the cost of a model in a series — and raises questions about Anthropic’s pricing strategy moving forward.
It's not AI anymore, it's ‘Super intelligence’ (according to the White House) | Equity Podcast
0 seconds of 36 minutes, 40 secondsVolume 0%
Topics
AI
AI
Anthropic
Apps
claude 3.5 haiku
Generative AI
Haiku
model
When you purchase through links in our articles, we may earn a small commission. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.
Kyle Wiggers
AI Editor
Kyle Wiggers was TechCrunch’s AI Editor until June 2025. His writing has appeared in VentureBeat and Digital Trends, as well as a range of gadget blogs including Android Police, Android Authority, Droid-Life, and XDA-Developers. He lives in Manhattan with his partner, a music therapist.
View Bio
October 13 – 15
San Francisco
Get 50% off a second pass
The Disrupt experience is meant to be shared. Get your pass and bring a colleague, partner, or peer at 50% off. Cover more ground by making connections, building momentum, and discovering what’s next in the startup ecosystem.
BOOK NOW
Most Popular
Google thinks SpaceX’s Starship has to launch 1,800 times before space data centers get off the ground
World’s first enhanced geothermal power plant completed in just 23 months
Google releases Gemini 4 Argon, called its most powerful model yet
The Pentagon taps Elon Musk and Palmer Luckey to help decide what the military should do next
OpenAI launches Dots, its bubbly agentic avatar
AMD will acquire Fei-Fei Li’s World Labs for $8.2B
Viral AI agent Instinct raises $1B Series C at a $10B valuation