A Reporter at Large
Sam Altman May Control Our Future—Can He Be Trusted?
New interviews and closely guarded documents shed light on the persistent doubts about the head of OpenAI.
By Ronan Farrow and Andrew Marantz
April 6, 2026
Altman promised to be a safe steward for A.I. But some of his colleagues believed that he was not trustworthy enough to, as one put it, “have his finger on the button.”Visual by David Szauder; Generated using A.I.
Your window is closing.
Don’t lose these views. Get full access for $2.69 $1 a week for one year, plus a free tote. Cancel or pause anytime.
See Offers
Already a subscriber? Sign In
Unlock this story for just $2.69 $1 a week for 1 year.
Subscribe »
Published in the print edition of the April 13, 2026, issue, with the headline “Moment of Truth.”
New Yorker Favorites
Parents disagreed on whether to vaccinate their children. Then the kids got sick.
Take a break with our Puzzles & Games.
A brilliant scientist’s dark motives for bringing children home to live with him.
The anger fuelling the Lindsay Clancy conspiracy theories.
Our critics’ picks for what to see, eat, and do this fall.
Want better search results? Make The New Yorker a preferred source in Google.
Sign up for our daily newsletter to receive the best stories from The New Yorker.
Ronan Farrow, a contributing writer at The New Yorker, has won a Pulitzer Prize and a George Polk Award. His 2025 podcast, “Not a Very Good Murderer,” is the basis for an HBO docuseries.
Andrew Marantz is a staff writer at The New Yorker and the author of “Antisocial: Online Extremists, Techno-Utopians, and the Hijacking of the American Conversation.”
The New Yorker Classics Newsletter
Gems from the archive that deliver timeless pleasures with fresh insight
SIGN UP
By signing up, you agree to our user agreement (including class action waiver and arbitration provisions), and acknowledge our privacy policy.
Read More
Infinite Scroll
Flock Wants a Closely Surveilled World with No Exit
The company, which has a hundred and thirty thousand cameras monitoring the streets of the U.S., frames privacy as a worthwhile trade-off for safety and security, echoing the language of the post-9/11 surveillance boom.
By Brady Brickner-Wood
Open Questions
Can A.I. “Go Rogue”?
In the wake of turmoil at OpenAI and Anthropic, it’s become common to describe A.I. as a kind of person, hatching plans and pursuing desires. The truth is a little trickier.
By Joshua Rothman
Open Questions
The Long Doomsday of A.I.
After industry-wide calls for regulation, what’s concerning isn’t that the problems are real. It’s that there are no guaranteed solutions.
By Joshua Rothman
Infinite Scroll
My Weekend with an A.I. Agent
What agentic A.I. is best at is optimizing processes that, not too long ago, were presented as the already maximally optimized version of a once analog experience.
By Brady Brickner-Wood
Annals of Law
Should I Stay or Should I Go?
The quandary faced by government lawyers who think that the Trump Administration is subverting justice.
By Eyal Press
Global Notes
Donald Trump Returns to the U.N. Amid the Collapse of the Old Order
Trump is at the heart of this geopolitical moment, catalytic in his alliance-fraying bullying, unprovoked warmongering, and protectionist demagoguery.
By Ishaan Tharoor
Comment
Our A.I. Problem
Why can’t the people who produced the technology, which has already shown that a different world is possible, just do the things that would prevent extinction?
By Gideon Lewis-Kraus
Brave New World Dept.
Is A.I. Above the Law?
Our legal system isn’t ready for machines that act on their own.
By Jill Lepore
Video Dept.
An OpenAI Engineer and His Friends Debate the Future
In Brent Katz’s short documentary “Josh’s Wedding,” a group of groomsmen reckon with a technology that one of them is building.
Fault Lines
Will A.I. Overwrite Our Sense of Shame?
The tech world has long been run by iconoclasts whose ideas about right and wrong are self-consciously different from those of most people.
By Jay Caspian Kang
Q. & A.
Why China Isn’t Getting Existential About A.I.
China’s fears about the technology are increasingly distinct from those of the U.S. What does that mean for international coöperation?
By Isaac Chotiner
The Lede
There Is No A.I. “Race”
We’re constantly told that Chinese advances would have catastrophic consequences. But the first to innovate is rarely the one who wins.
By Chang Che