In Brief
Posted:
3:27 PM PDT · August 23, 2024
Image Credits: Justin Sullivan / Getty Images
•
• Maxwell Zeff
‘Disappointed but not surprised’: Former employees speak on OpenAI’s opposition to SB 1047
Two former OpenAI researchers who resigned this year over safety concerns say they are disappointed but not surprised by OpenAI’s decision to oppose California’s bill to prevent AI disasters, SB 1047. Daniel Kokotajlo and William Saunders previously warned that OpenAI is in a “reckless” race for dominance .
“Sam Altman, our former boss, has repeatedly called for AI regulation,” they wrote in a letter that was shared with Politico and that urges California governor Gavin Newsom to sign the bill . “Now, when actual regulation is on the table, he opposes it.” The two add that, “With appropriate regulation, we hope OpenAI may yet live up to its mission statement of building AGI safely.”
Responding to the former employees, an OpenAI spokesperson said the startup “strongly disagrees with the mischaracterization of our position on SB 1047,” in a statement to TechCrunch. The spokesperson pointed to AI bills in Congress that OpenAI has endorsed , noting that “frontier AI safety regulations should be implemented at the federal level because of their implications for national security and competitiveness.”
OpenAI rival Anthropic has expressed support for the bill while presenting specific concerns and asking for amendments. Several have since been incorporated, and on Thursday, CEO Dario Amodei wrote to Newsom, saying the current bill’s “ benefits likely outweigh its costs, ” while not fully endorsing the bill.
Topics
AI , AI regulation , ai safety , california , Government & Policy , In Brief , OpenAI , SB 1047
October 13 – 15
San Francisco
Get 50% off a second pass
The Disrupt experience is meant to be shared. Get your pass and bring a colleague, partner, or peer at 50% off. Cover more ground by making connections, building momentum, and discovering what’s next in the startup ecosystem.
BOOK NOW
Newsletters
See More
Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news
TechCrunch Daily News
Every weekday and Sunday, you can get the best of TechCrunch’s coverage.
TechCrunch Mobility
TechCrunch Mobility is your destination for transportation news and insight.
Startups Weekly
Startups are the core of TechCrunch, so get our best coverage delivered weekly.
StrictlyVC
Provides movers and shakers with the info they need to start their day.
No newsletters selected.
Subscribe
By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice .
Related
•
AI
OpenAI gives Codex reusable cloud environments that work across devices
• Sarah Perez
7 hours ago
•
Security
OpenAI apologizes to Australia after its AI agents breached government sites
• Kate Park
12 hours ago
•
AI
Nvidia launches new platform for reining in rogue AI agents
• Kirsten Korosec
1 day ago
Latest in AI
•
AI
America.gov gets really weird when you ask it about Minecraft, but it’s not a glitch
• Amanda Silberling
49 minutes ago
•
In Brief
The internet is convinced Elon Musk’s xAI trolled OpenAI’s ‘Dots’ launch
• Julie Bort
2 hours ago
•
AI
OpenAI’s latest features take direct aim at the app store model
• Sarah Perez
4 hours ago