Maxwell Zeff
Business
Jun 10, 2026 11:11 PM
Anthropic Walks Back Policy That Could Have ‘Sabotaged’ AI Researchers Using Claude
The company changed course after researchers spoke out against the policy, which would have covertly limited Claude’s ability to develop competing AI models.
Photograph: Chris Ratcliffe/Getty Images
Save this story
Save this story
Anthropic is backtracking on a policy that would have covertly limited competitors from using its new AI model, Claude Fable 5 , to develop other AI models. The company changed course after the move received significant backlash from the AI research community .
“We’re changing Fable 5’s safeguards for frontier LLM development to make them visible,” Anthropic said in a statement to WIRED. “We made the wrong trade-off and we apologize for not getting the balance right.”
Anthropic released Claude Fable 5, a version of its latest AI model with additional safety guardrails designed to prevent misuse, earlier this week. Some of the safeguards Anthropic decided on were unsurprising: The company said it would reroute users who asked questions about cybersecurity, biology, or chemistry to a less capable AI model to reduce the chances of someone using the advanced AI to carry out a cyberattack or build a bioweapon.
But for researchers trying to use Claude Fable 5 for frontier AI development, Anthropic outlined a different approach. The firm would deliberately degrade the model’s performance in ways that were invisible to the user. The move would effectively sabotage researchers trying to use Claude to train competing AI models, which Anthropic explicitly bans in its terms of service .
Got a Tip?
Are you a current or former Anthropic employee who wants to talk about what's happening? We'd like to hear from you. Using a nonwork phone or computer, contact the reporter securely on Signal at mzeff.88.
Anthropic now says it’s changing course, and that Claude Fable 5’s safeguards for AI development will be visible to users. If the company suspects a user is trying to use Claude to build a highly capable AI, it will alert them that it’s either refusing the request or rerouting the user to a less capable model.
Anthropic reversed the policy after it received fierce backlash from the AI research community. Anthropic has already taken steps to limit competitors from using Claude to build closed- and open-source AI models, but critics say that quietly degrading the model’s performance for certain users went a step too far. Claude’s coding agent has become a favored tool among developers, including those working on open-source AI research projects, and researchers tell WIRED that the company’s latest policy could have led to a troubling future in which only a handful of leading AI labs could perform advanced AI research.
Dean Ball, a senior fellow at the Foundation for American Innovation and a former adviser to the White House on AI, wrote in a post on X that “degrading performance on ML research *without telling the user* is shockingly hostile and a terrible look.” He continued in another post that the “secret sabotage” policy undermines Anthropic’s overall stance, because it limits AI researchers from collaborating on AI safety.
“It felt like Anthropic was saying to the public, ‘We don't trust anybody else to do AI research. We are the only ones who have to do AI research,” says Will Brown, research lead at the open-source AI startup Prime Intellect. “It feels a bit like they’re starting to pull the ladder up behind them.”
Brown said the policy would also have left developers in the dark about whether they were violating Anthropic’s rules, since the company wouldn’t alert them when its safeguards were triggered. He added that the restrictions could have had widespread consequences. For example, he pointed to the growing ecosystem of third-party evaluation firms that test frontier models for safety, performance, and reliability—work that could have been hindered if Anthropic secretly degraded its model.
Anthropic said it implemented the measures because Claude has become increasingly effective at accelerating AI research. In a recent blog post , the company said it is concerned that AI could improve its capabilities faster than society can adapt to them. Anthropic argued that it would be “good for the world to have the option to slow or temporarily pause frontier AI development to enable societal structures and alignment research to keep up.”
“These safeguards prevent foreign adversaries from using our most capable models in ways that pose severe safety risks. The US and its allies hold an edge in frontier chips and the highly optimized software that runs them at full potential,” the company said in a statement to WIRED. “These safeguards ensure Claude isn't used to erode that advantage—by optimizing chips developed by those adversaries, for example … In deciding whether to make them visible or invisible we faced a choice. A hidden safeguard is harder to probe and work around. This means the safeguards can be targeted much more narrowly.”
Anthropic says that because this safeguard around AI development is now visible, it needs to cast a wider net, meaning more benign requests may trigger its safeguards. The company says it’s working to make its classifiers more precise as quickly as possible.
Comments
Back to top
Join the discussion
Comments
Back to top
You Might Also Like
• Introducing the app: More ways to make the most of WIRED
• OpenAI claimed a huge math discovery —some academics cried foul
• Big Story: Her life was destroyed by the burnerverse —so she fought back
• Apple doesn’t want you to worry about the Apple Watch’s listening features
• In your inbox: Go inside the world of digital security with Kernel Panic
Maxwell Zeff is a senior writer at WIRED covering the business of artificial intelligence. He was previously a senior reporter with TechCrunch, where he broke news on startups and leaders driving the AI boom. Before that, Zeff covered AI policy and content moderation for Gizmodo and wrote some of Bloomberg’s ... Read More
Senior Writer
Topics Anthropic Claude generative AI artificial intelligence Startups
Read More
Top AT&T Promo Codes: $50 Off This October 2026
Whether you’re looking to upgrade your internet or get the latest phone, we’ve got you covered with our selection of AT&T coupons and deals.
Kat Merck
Limited Time: TurboTax Coupons Full Service This October 2026
Tax season doesn’t have to be stressful. Score 10% off full service expert on federal tax filings and more exclusive TurboTax discount codes on WIRED.
Molly Higgins
Starz Promo Codes & Deals for 2026
Ready to stream award-winning series, hit movies, and exclusive originals? Our comprehensive guide helps you find every active Starz coupon, free trial, and discount code to save big on your subscription this 2026.
Molly Higgins
Top Mattress Firm Coupons: Save up to $700
Use a Mattress Firm promo code to save on top mattresses, score a free adjustable base, and unlock up to $300 in instant credits.
Nena Farrell
Squarespace Promo Codes: 20% Off in October 2026
Get 20% off your next website, 10% off with exclusive Squarespace discount code, 50% off plans, and more top coupons from WIRED.
Molly Higgins
Best Surfshark Promo Codes for October 2026
Save up to 87% with a Surfshark coupon code, 3 months of VPN free today, and more from WIRED.
Gear Team
Nike Promo Codes: 30% Off for October 2026
Check out our deals for Nike this October 2026, including 15% off select purchases.
Boutayna Chokrane
Nomad Goods Promo Codes: Get 25% Off in October 2026
Save up to 25% on Nomad Goods accessories such as Nomad phone cases, Nomad wallets, and more in October 2026.
Molly Higgins
Top Uber Eats Promo Codes for October 2026
Hunger meets savings. Discover verified Uber Eats promo codes, new user offers, and Uber One discounts to slash your delivery fees and meal costs.
Molly Higgins
eBay Coupons in October 2026
Save up to 60% on a selection of items at eBay, including electronics, home products, card games, car parts and more.
Molly Higgins
Top LG Promo Codes and Coupons for October 2026
Save 20% with an LG promo code today, plus up to $1,000 off appliances, 40% off bestselling TVs and monitors.
Harry Rabinowitz
Maytag Promo Codes: 15% Off
Upgrade your home for less with these verified Maytag discount codes, military savings, and limited-time closeout offers on washers, dryers, and more.
Matthew Korfhage