Trending now
1
‘We are going to start looking a lot more like Europe’: Millennials are living at home into their 30s, signaling a major shift
2
Billionaire oil tycoon Harold Hamm donates $150M to the University of Oklahoma to help study a cause that’s personal to him: diabetes
3
Uber CEO says ‘really demanding’ work culture includes expecting employees to answer emails over the weekend: ‘Don’t come here if you want to coast’
1
‘We are going to start looking a lot more like Europe’: Millennials are living at home into their 30s, signaling a major shift
2
Billionaire oil tycoon Harold Hamm donates $150M to the University of Oklahoma to help study a cause that’s personal to him: diabetes
3
Uber CEO says ‘really demanding’ work culture includes expecting employees to answer emails over the weekend: ‘Don’t come here if you want to coast’
Newsletters Fortune Tech
Why Reddit sued Anthropic
By Andrew Nusca
Andrew Nusca
Editorial Director, Brainstorm
By Andrew Nusca
Andrew Nusca
Editorial Director, Brainstorm
June 5, 2025, 6:49 AM ET
Updated June 5, 2025, 7:09 AM ET
Add Fortune on Google for similar content.
Add us on Google
Add us on Google
Good morning. Jeff Bezos said last year that he wanted to be judged by how much wealth he’s created for other people. Why not tweak that to “value”?
For the fifth year, Fortune partnered with Indiggo to do just that. Our ROL100 —as in “return on leadership”—measures leadership value creation in the Fortune 100 .
And wouldn’t you know, tech companies fare well. Microsoft and Nvidia take the list’s top two spots, respectively, for strategic clarity, leadership alignment, and disciplined execution. Alphabet, Cisco, Dell, Apple, and HP round out the top quartile.
Read more about the ranking here . Today’s tech news below. —Andrew Nusca
Want to send thoughts or suggestions to Fortune Tech? Drop a line here .
Reddit sues Anthropic
Reddit CEO Steve Huffman on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange during Reddit’s initial public offering on March 21, 2024 in New York City. (Photo: Spencer Platt/Getty Images)
Get ready to rumble.
Reddit sued Anthropic on Wednesday, alleging that the AI startup was illegally “scraping” Reddit comments to train its chatbot.
The popular social media site alleges that Anthropic used automated bots to access the content despite being asked not to do so, and failed to get users’ consent.
“AI companies should not be allowed to scrape information and content from people without clear limitations on how they can use that data,” Reddit’s chief legal officer said.
Anthropic rejected the claims. “We disagree with Reddit's claims and will defend ourselves vigorously,” it said in a statement.
Reddit has licensing agreements with Google, OpenAI, and other Anthropic rivals to receive compensation in exchange for the companies’ commercial use of the data—that is, training their AI systems on Reddit comments.
But not Anthropic.
The lawsuit cites a 2021 paper co-authored by Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei that describes Reddit’s user forums, or “subreddits,” as a source of high-quality AI training data.
A 2023 Anthropic letter to the U.S. Copyright Office argued that the way its chatbot, Claude, trains “qualifies as a quintessentially lawful use of materials” because it copies information to perform statistical analysis.
But Reddit’s lawsuit doesn’t allege copyright infringement, just a breach of its terms of use. —AN
Amazon to invest $10 billion in North Carolina
Good news, Tar Heels: Amazon says it will invest $10 billion to expand its cloud computing and artificial intelligence infrastructure in North Carolina.
A new campus is on tap for rural Richmond County (pop: 41,990), about an hour’s drive east of Charlotte, that will create at least 500 jobs, among them engineers and security specialists.
Gov. Josh Stein said the investment was one of the state’s largest ever. “Artificial intelligence is changing the way we work and innovate, and I am pleased that North Carolina will stay at the forefront of all that’s ahead as we continue to attract top technology companies like Amazon,” he said in a statement .
County commissioners unanimously approved an incentives package that would give Amazon annual cash grants for two decades, calculated on the basis of property taxes levied on the site of the planned data center.
Earlier this year, Apple said it would boost its investment in the state and expand its existing 1 million sq. ft. datacenter in Catawba County, about an hour’s drive northwest of Charlotte, by almost 25%.
Microsoft is also building out infrastructure in Catawba County. The company in 2022 announced plans to spend at least $1 billion on four data centers in the area, though it was reported earlier this year to be slowing construction on the site. —AN
Hackers are stealing companies’ Salesforce data, Google says
If you’re one of Salesforce’s more than 150,000 customers, listen up.
A hacking group reportedly has been impersonating IT staffers via phone calls to break into the Salesforce instances at various companies in an attempt to steal their data.
That revelation comes courtesy of Google’s threat intelligence group, who say the hackers’ ultimate aims are extortion.
“This approach has proven particularly effective in tricking employees, often within English-speaking branches of multinational corporations, into actions that grant the attackers access or lead to the sharing of sensitive credentials, ultimately facilitating the theft of organization’s Salesforce data.”
Ouch.
The hackers, who have been linked to a group called the Com, have already successfully breached networks of at least 20 companies in the U.S. and Europe. Sometimes the extortion demands didn’t come until months later, the report adds.
Google was quick to note there wasn’t any technical flaw in Salesforce software to allow this to happen, just good old fashioned social engineering. Ah, humans. —AN
More tech
— Epic v. Apple. An appeals court rejects Apple’s request to pause parts of judicial order to open App Store to competition.
— Eric Schmidt’s AI Expo in Washington: LLMs, Lockheed Martin, and soft lobbying.
— Circle prices IPO. At $31 per share, it’s above its marketed range and values the payments company at about $6.9 billion.
— Deere paid ethical hackers $1.5 million to detect flaws and protect farm equipment.
— Meta’s sub-$1,000 VR device. The company has reportedly talked with A24, Disney, and others about content deals.
— Dating apps have a Gen Z problem , and Match Group’s CEO is trying to turn the ship.
— Dropbox CEO on Apple, Google, Microsoft competition : “You can’t really control what your opponents are doing. You can only control how well you play.”
— Control your iPhone with AirPods? It could come at Apple’s upcoming WWDC.
— 23andMe data auction. Anne Wojcicki is ready to outbid Regeneron in a new round.
Endstop triggered
This is the web version of Fortune Tech, a daily newsletter breaking down the biggest players and stories shaping the future. Sign up to get it delivered free to your inbox.
About the Author By Andrew Nusca Editorial Director, Brainstorm
Andrew Nusca is the editorial director of Brainstorm, Fortune 's innovation-obsessed community and event series. He also authors Fortune Tech , Fortune ’s flagship tech newsletter.
See full bio
Latest in Newsletters
Most Popular