This website uses cookies
We use cookies to personalise content and ads, to provide social media features and to analyse our traffic. We also share information about your use of our site with our social media, advertising and analytics partners who may combine it with other information that you’ve provided to them or that they’ve collected from your use of their services.
Consent Selection
Necessary
Preferences
Statistics
Marketing
Show details
Allow all
Allow selection
Deny
Search The Bureau Website
Stories
Explore
About Us
Newsletter
Support Us
14.08.26 BIG TECH
How Musk’s toxic data empire is powering Anthropic’s ‘responsible’ AI
It built a reputation as AI’s good guys. Now Anthropic is paying billions for energy from one of America’s dirtiest data centres
We expose injustice and spark change. Help change the world by becoming a Bureau Insider
Support TBIJ
Published August 14 2026
By Effie Webb , James Clayton
TBIJ co-publishes its stories with major media outlets around the world so they reach as many people as possible.
Find out how to use our work
In Brief
- Hide
Anthropic has struck a deal with Elon Musk’s Colossus site in Memphis, where residents say they have been left with ‘poison and pollution’
Environmental groups are taking legal action over allegations that SpaceXAI operated gas turbines there without the required air permits or controls
While locals say promised jobs and climate measures have come to nothing, the deal allows Anthropic to boost its growth and SpaceXAI to pocket over $1bn a month
The self-appointed good guys of AI are now drawing energy from one of the world’s most controversial data centres.
Anthropic, the AI company behind Claude, has built a reputation as the cautious, safety-first name in AI. But as demand for Claude and its coding tool has boomed, the company turned to Elon Musk’s toxic SpaceX facility in Memphis, Tennessee, for additional computing power.
Colossus – the primary computing backbone used to train and power Musk’s own Grok AI models – has spent much of the past two years at the centre of local backlash and a legal dispute over pollution.
Data centres require vast amounts of electricity and water, and some also generate persistent noise. If fossil fuels are used to power them, that can mean local air pollution.
As companies build more data centres to meet demand for AI computing, local opposition is becoming more common. Musk has pushed to build AI infrastructure at speed while environmental groups and local residents have challenged the way the facilities have been powered.
Anthropic, meanwhile, has cultivated a markedly different public image. Founded in 2021 by former OpenAI staff who felt the technology’s risks weren’t being taken seriously enough, its self-stated purpose is “the responsible development and maintenance of advanced AI”. The company has built its reputation around AI safety and placed restrictions on how its technology can be used – even when those restrictions have threatened its own interests.
Watch us explore the Colossus data centre with Keshaun Pearson in the fourth episode of Misaligned, our new series on the dark sides of AI
Anthropic’s climate commitments have been less conspicuous, though in 2024, CEO Dario Amodei argued that AI could help tackle climate change, writing that it would help improve technologies including carbon removal and clean energy.
But Anthropic’s growth now depends on huge amounts of computing power. In Memphis, Colossus has become a source of anger for locals. We visited the site earlier this year with Keshaun Pearson, a resident and director of local environmental justice non-profit Memphis Community Against Pollution.
We saw rows of methane-burning gas turbines, installed during the site’s rapid build after it become clear Colossus needed more power than was initially available.
Pearson said residents were told that the turbines, which resemble “jet engines turned on their side”, would be temporary.
“It’s been almost two years, and they’re still operating 24/7,” he said.
The nearest homes are in Boxtown, a historically Black neighbourhood in South Memphis surrounded by industrial sites. “This taste in my mouth, this feeling in my throat, this is what the families of Boxtown experience every single day,” Pearson said.
Gas turbines at the Colossus site in Memphis, SpaceXAI’s first data centre built at breakneck speed
Colossus, SpaceXAI’s first data centre, came online in 2024 and was built in months after a 122-day build-out – a breakneck speed the company’s CEO has proudly pointed to. Since then it’s been at the centre of a long-running dispute: environmental groups are suing SpaceXAI, alleging it has been operating dozens of turbines without the required air permits or pollution controls.
When we first visited in March, Pearson questioned how SpaceXAI had managed to install the turbines before securing permits.
“I can’t open a coffee shop without getting the right permits. I can’t open an ice-cream stand without the right permits, or I would get shut down,” he told us. “Somehow, this company was able to install a microgrid that could produce up to 300 megawatts of power without a single permit.”
Pearson also accused SpaceXAI of trying to intimidate people visiting the site. As we explored the site together, Pearson said security staff had photographed people’s vehicle number plates.
“They want you to feel as if you are out of place,” he said. “But this is public land, and my family’s been here far longer than they have.”
Keshaun Pearson speaking to us in Memphis for our series Misaligned
Musk’s rapid build-out of Colossus faces intense scrutiny. But Anthropic, which now harnesses much of the power, has faced barely any.
Anthropic announced in May that it would start using Colossus’s computing capacity.
It’s an unusual fit. Not only has Anthropic built its reputation on AI safety, it is also a direct rival to Musk’s own SpaceXAI and a company Musk had spent months publicly bad-mouthing.
In February, Anthropic made a very public stand against the US government. It refused to remove restrictions on the use of Claude for mass domestic surveillance and fully autonomous weapons, saying current systems were not reliable enough to control them fully and safely.
Musk sided against Anthropic, claiming in a post on X that “Anthropic hates Western Civilization”. The same day, as the Pentagon’s dispute escalated, US Defence Secretary Pete Hegseth said he was designating the company a supply-chain risk. (Musk had already described Anthropic as “misanthropic and evil” earlier that month.)
Three months later, that public hostility gave way to a commercial relationship with Anthropic agreeing to buy computing capacity from Colossus at a reported rate of $1.25bn a month. After meeting senior staff at the company, Musk said they were “highly competent” and cared about “doing the right thing”.
“No one set off my evil detector,” Musk wrote on X.
Developer and AI commentator Simon Willison has criticised Anthropic’s decision to use Colossus, describing the site as having a “particularly bad environmental record”. He said the deal was a “really bad look” given political controversy surrounding data centres.
In response to detailed questions from the Bureau, Anthropic pointed to a $1m donation to Memphis-based technology education nonprofit CodeCrew, and to public statements about discussions with local policymakers. It did not address questions about environmental checks, consultation with local campaign groups or safeguards in its agreement with Colossus.
Anthropic has not directly addressed Memphis residents’ concerns over pollution and water use.
It has made some green commitments, joining Frontier, a coalition that funds the development of carbon-removal technology, in June.
But when the Bureau spoke to Pearson several months after the deal, he said he had seen little evidence of Anthropic taking a different approach in Memphis.
“There are no good guys,” he said. “Same pattern, different players.”
SpaceXAI didn’t respond to a request for comment. In a press release last month the company said it would aim to remove temporary turbines by July 2027.
Watch Keshaun Pearson show us around the Colossus site in the latest episode of Misaligned, our series on the dark sides of AI, on YouTube here.
Reporters: Effie Webb and James Clayton
Big tech editor: James Clayton
Deputy editor: Chrissie Giles
Editor: Franz Wild
Production editor: Lydia Morrish
TBIJ has a number of funders, a full list of which can be found here. None of our funders have any influence over editorial decisions or output.
Area: Tech
Subject: Artificial intelligence
About The Authors
Effie Webb
Effie Webb is a reporter on TBIJ’s Big Tech team
More by Effie Webb
Email
James Clayton
James joined TBIJ after four years as the BBC’s North America tech correspondent. He was also a producer and correspondent for Newsnight
More by James Clayton
More From Big Tech
Failed by the police, Grok deepfake victims are seeking justice themselves
29 September 2026
Eton parents’ revolt reflects growing anxieties over classroom tech
27 September 2026
OpenAI agents hijacked a website. Why didn’t the company tell anyone?
11 September 2026
Barclays greenlights work with Israeli defence company
3 September 2026
Projects
Environment
Local Power
Big Tech
The Enablers
Global Health
Family Court Files
All Projects
Got a Story?
For Journalists
Contacting the Bureau
How to Talk to a Journalist
About
About Us
Contact Us
Use Our Work
Our Funding
Financials
Awards
Privacy Policy
The Trust for TBIJ
Employment
Complaints
Corrections
The Bureau of Investigative Journalism
PO Box 76421
London
EC2P 2SH
Email: info@thebureauinvestigates.com
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 Unported License.
Corporations
Binary Options
Corporate Watch
Fixed-Odds Betting Machines
High Cost Credit
High Frequency Trading
Smoke Screen
Food and Drugs
Big Tobacco
Justice
Deaths in Police Custody
Family Court Files
Investigating Rape
Joint Enterprise
Rough Justice
Human Rights
CIA Torture
Citizenship Revoked
Drone Warfare
Iraq War Logs
Marikana Massacre
Migration Crisis
Privatised War
Shadow Wars
Surveillance State
Trapped in work
PR and Spin
Fake News
Lobbying’s Hidden Influence
State Scrutiny
Care Sector
Europe Under Scrutiny
Health
Political Party Funding
Public Sector Pay
Royal Mail
Rulers’ Riches
Scrutinising Government
Teaching
The Enablers
Bureau Local
Local Stories
Open Resources
Cost of living crisis
Domestic Violence
Homelessness
Is Work Working?
Local Power
The Housing Crisis
The People’s Newsroom
UK Elections