AI + ML
Ex-OpenAI board member accuses Sam Altman of 'outright lying'
Claims she and other members 'learned about ChatGPT on Twitter'
Richard Speed
Published Wed 29 May 2024 // 15:15 UTC
OpenAI's board was only aware that ChatGPT had been launched after reading about it on Twitter, according to a former board member.
Helen Toner, an AI researcher with an interest in the regulation of the technology, made the allegation on the TED AI Show podcast. Toner had been a board member at the time, and departed shortly after Sam Altman was fired and rehired by OpenAI late last year.
Toner was fiercely critical of Altman in the interview, and described the situation at OpenAI as "a completely unworkable place to be in as a board, especially a board that is supposed to be providing independent oversight over the company, not just helping the CEO to raise more money."
According to Toner, "We just couldn't believe the things that Sam was telling us."
The board was blindsided by ChatGPT's surprise launch, she alleged. "We learned about ChatGPT on Twitter," said Toner. Another example was Altman's ownership of the OpenAI Startup Fund.
Toner said, "On multiple occasions, he gave us inaccurate information about the small number of formal safety processes that the company did have in place, meaning it was basically impossible for the board to know how well those safety processes were working or what might need to change."
According to Toner, the mistrust reached the point where the board decided that Altman had to go, and the mayhem of last November ensued. Altman was abruptly fired and then welcomed back the following month.
"The OpenAI saga," said Toner, "shows that trying to do good and regulating yourself isn't enough."
Part of the friction experienced by Toner might have been due to a paper she co-wrote that appeared to criticize OpenAI's approach to safety compared to rival Anthropic. For her part, Toner described the paper as "way overplayed in the press." However, it is not difficult to imagine Altman being less than impressed by it.
MORE CONTEXT
OpenAI sets up safety group in wake of high-profile exits
OpenAI tells employees it won't claw back their vested equity
Read AI about it... OpenAI does deal with News Corp
Scarlett Johansson voices anger at OpenAI's unauthorized soundalike
"The problem was that after the paper came out, Sam started lying to other board members in order to push me off the board," Toner claimed.
Anthropic has been collecting former OpenAI staffers and scooping $4 billion from Amazon. Most recently, Jan Leike, formerly a lead safety researcher at OpenAI, announced that he would be joining Anthropic.
The Register asked OpenAI for comment on Toner's allegations and was directed to the closing minutes of the podcast, in which Bret Taylor, chair of the OpenAI board, said the super lab was "disappointed that Ms Toner continues to revisit these issues."
Taylor pointed out that the prior board's decision was not based on concerns around safety nor OpenAI's finances. He also claimed that more than 95 percent of OpenAI's employees asked for Altman's reinstatement and the resignation of the prior board.
"Our focus remains on moving forward and pursuing OpenAI's mission to ensure AGI benefits all of humanity." ®
OPENAI SOFTWARE AI AND ML
Azure maintenance mess disrupts hybrid clouds, VPNs, cloudy VMware services
Microsoft broke its own cloud but isn’t sure how
Irony alert: OpenAI whines that Chinese model stole its special IP that it stole from everybody else
US model makers can train on web data - but distilling theirs is a 'national security risk'
Huawei Cloud Rolls Out Enterprise AI Products Across the Board, Building an Open Agentic Cloud
PARTNER CONTENT: Huawei Cloud strengthens the silicon bedrock on the cloud
YouTube lunatic designed and 3D printed a working mechanical calculator
If you can't afford a Curta, we still don't recommend trying this: It'll eat up months of your life and all the filament you have
OpenAI apes AWS Marketplace while Anthropic remains stubbornly Microsoftian
By including Baseten in its marketplace, OpenAI signals it wants its models to win on the merits, not through coercion
Huawei boss claims homegrown AI chip sales top Nvidia in China
The chips may not be as advanced, but they won't get banned at a moment's notice, Eric Xu says
TOP STORIES
Astronomer watches Starlink satellites sinking to build a ‘planetary barometer’
AI models keep posting screenshots showing sensitive data from inside tech companies
Microsoft tells nonprofits their deleted M365 data isn't coming back
Google ending ChromeOS support two years early
ShinyHunters claims FBI hack: 'This is NOT financially motivated'
FBI to ShinyHunters: 'We know how to find you'
AI
Hot Dog! America's new chatbot is packed with wieners
Just ask America.gov and you'll receive a favorite July 4th food.
Huawei boss claims homegrown AI chip sales top Nvidia in China
The chips may not be as advanced, but they won't get banned at a moment's notice, Eric Xu says
Add one more AI worry to the nightmare scenario: self-replicating prompt injections
It's a worm attack, AI-style
Zuckerberg touts enterprise AI push because Meta would never do anything to damage your reputation
New business unit to be led by former MongoDB CEO 'CJ' Desai
AMD's 192 GB Gorgon Halo prices might leave you petrified
Regular pricing starts at $6,799 - all that memory doesn't come cheap
Infosec
Security
Russians are posing as Signal support to launch phishing attacks
PLUS: US takes down Iranian propaganda sites; Marketing company asks 'Why Do We Have Your Information?' And more!
Security
Microsoft patches failed to fix on-prem SharePoint, which is now under zero-day attack
PLUS: China upgrades smartphone surveillance tools; Ring eases anti-snooping stance; and more
Black Hat and DEF CON
DEF CON Franklin project enlists hackers to harden critical infrastructure
Voting village reports have been so successful, says Jeff Moss, that the whole of DEF CON will now be included
Security
EQT buys majority share in Swiss cybersecurity biz Acronis
Went at equivalent of $3.5B+ valuation for entire firm, though portion sold not specified
Malware Month
Ten years since the first corp ransomware, Mikko Hyppönen sees no end in sight
On the plus side, infosec's a good bet for a long, stable career
FOSS
Firefox 157: Could bold new look be just what Mozilla needs?*
Yet another new version of Firefox, with a significant reskin
KDE turns 30 and someone's brought an AI-native desktop proposal
Akademy talk imagines Plasma assembling itself around a personal model of each user
Shopify extends lifeline to Tailwind as vibe coding erodes web dev platform's bottom line
Acquisition gives open source CSS framework 'a stable long-term home'
Switzerland tests a FOSS escape route from Microsoft 365
Swiss Army sticks a knife in American cloud apps with its own FOSS push
Feel peak Windows was 7? You might like Kumander Linux
Debian and Xfce – solid, sensible choices – with a pretty skin
Canonical shuttering some of its legacy chat channels
The Ubuntu Pastebin went in June, IRC gets demoted next