How your data is used to improve model performance | OpenAI Help Center
• All Collections
• Privacy and policies
• Policy FAQ
• How your data is used to improve model performance
How your data is used to improve model performance
Learn more about how OpenAI uses content from our services to improve and train our models.
Updated: 19 hours ago
Note : Data retention for certain services may be affected by recent legal developments – please see our blog post for more details.
One of the most useful and promising features of AI models is that they can improve over time. We continuously improve our models through research breakthroughs as well as exposure to real-world problems and data. When you share your content with us, it helps our models become more accurate and better at solving your specific problems and it also helps improve their general capabilities and safety. We don’t use your content to market our services or create advertising profiles of you—we use it to make our models more helpful. ChatGPT, for instance, improves by further training on the conversations people have with it, unless you opt out .
Services for individuals, such as ChatGPT, Codex, and Sora
When you use our services for individuals such as ChatGPT, Codex, and Sora, we may use your content to train our models.
You can opt out of training through our privacy portal by clicking on “do not train on my content.” To turn off training for your ChatGPT conversations and Codex tasks, follow the instructions in our Data Controls FAQ . Once you opt out, new conversations will not be used to train our models.
Even if you’ve opted out of training, you can still choose to provide feedback to us about your interactions with our products (for instance, by selecting thumbs up or thumbs down on a model response). If you choose to provide feedback, the entire conversation associated with that feedback may be used to train our models.
When you use ChatGPT, you can also use Temporary Chat from the dropdown. Chats from Temporary Chat won't appear in history, use or create memories, or be used to train our models.
Sora has separate controls, and you can similarly turn off training in the Sora Settings menu. Additionally, if you opt out of training through our privacy porta l, this will apply to Sora too. (Note that adjusting your settings in the ChatGPT interface will not affect your Sora settings, however.)
Codex has separate controls for allowing training on full environments, which you can manage in the Codex Settings . Note that adjusting your settings in the ChatGPT interface or privacy portal will not affect these full-environment Codex settings.)
Services for businesses, such as ChatGPT Team, ChatGPT Enterprise, and our API Platform
By default, we do not train on any inputs or outputs from our products for business users, including ChatGPT Team, ChatGPT Enterprise, and the API. We offer API customers a way to opt-in to share data with us, such as by providing feedback in the Playground , which we then use to improve our models. Unless they explicitly opt-in, organizations are opted out of data-sharing by default.
Please see our Enterprise Privacy page for information on how we handle business data.
What the process looks like
We retain certain data from your interactions with us, but we take steps to reduce the amount of personal information in our training datasets before they are used to improve and train our models. This data helps us better understand user needs and preferences, allowing our model to become more efficient over time.
For more on how we handle data, please see our Privacy Policy , Terms of Use , and Enterprise Privacy page .
Was this article helpful?
Submit
ChatGPT API Service Status Cookie Preferences
