How your data is used to improve model performance | OpenAI Help Center
• All Collections
• Privacy and policies
• Policy FAQ
• How your data is used to improve model performance
How your data is used to improve model performance
Learn how content from OpenAI’s services may be used to improve models and how to manage your available controls.
Updated: 4 hours ago
Overview
OpenAI offers settings that help you control whether eligible content can be used to improve model performance.
When enabled, OpenAI may use eligible content to improve the performance and safety of its models. You can control whether new conversations and tasks are included.
Before using eligible user content to improve our models, we take steps to reduce the amount of personal information in training datasets. For more information, see: Consumer privacy .
For more on how we handle data, please see our Privacy Policy , Terms of Use , and Enterprise Privacy page .
Services for individuals
When you use our services for individuals, such as ChatGPT and Codex, we may use your content to train our models. You can choose whether your conversations help improve our models. To opt out, turn off Improve the model for everyone under Settings > Data controls in ChatGPT, or select Do not train on my content in our Privacy Portal .
Either option is sufficient for ChatGPT conversations and Codex tasks. You don’t need to do both. After you opt out, we won’t use your new conversations to improve our models. For more information, see: Data controls in ChatGPT .
Even if you have opted out of training, you can still choose to provide feedback to us about your interactions with our products (for instance, by selecting thumbs up or thumbs down on a model response). If you choose to provide feedback, the entire conversation associated with that feedback may be used to train our models.
OpenAI Support conversations
Conversations with OpenAI Support may be used to improve OpenAI services, including our models, if Improve the model for everyone is enabled in Settings .
Codex
Codex has a separate Include environments setting in Codex settings for allowing training on full environments. Changing your settings in ChatGPT or the Privacy Portal does not change that setting.
Temporary chats
Temporary chats are not used to improve OpenAI models while they remain temporary, even if you choose personalization. They do not appear in your chat history or create or update memories.
If you save a temporary chat, it becomes a regular chat and follows your account’s personalization and model-improvement settings.
For more information about temporary chat, see: Temporary chat in ChatGPT .
Parental controls
For a linked teen account, a parent or guardian may manage whether conversations can be used to improve our models through Parental controls .
Business services and managed workspaces
By default, we don’t use inputs or outputs from ChatGPT Business, ChatGPT Enterprise, ChatGPT Edu, or our API to improve our models. The same applies to content in ChatGPT for Academic Researchers workspaces.
API organization owners can enable data sharing. When they do, members can choose to share feedback and the current API Playground chat to help improve OpenAI models.
For information about how we handle business data, see: Enterprise privacy .
FAQ
What if I submit feedback after opting out?
If you proactively choose to submit feedback, such as by selecting thumbs up or thumbs down on a response, the entire conversation associated with that feedback may be used to improve our models, even if you’ve opted out.
Was this article helpful?
Submit
ChatGPT API Service Status Cookie Preferences
