How your data is used to improve model performance | OpenAI Help Center
• All Collections
• Privacy and policies
• Policy FAQ
• How your data is used to improve model performance
How your data is used to improve model performance
Learn more about how OpenAI uses content from our services to improve and train our models.
Updated: yesterday
One of the most useful and promising features of AI models is that they can improve over time. We continuously improve our models through research breakthroughs as well as exposure to real-world problems and data. When you allow your content to be used to train our models, it helps our models become more accurate and better at solving your specific problems and it also helps improve their general capabilities and safety. ChatGPT, for instance, improves by further training on the conversations people have with it, unless you opt out .
Services for individuals, such as ChatGPT and Codex
When you use our services for individuals such as ChatGPT and Codex, we may use your content to train our models.
To opt out of model training, you can turn off “Improve the model for everyone” in ChatGPT under Settings → Data Controls, or select “Do not train on my content” in our privacy portal . For ChatGPT and Codex tasks, either option is sufficient. You do not need to opt out in both places. After you opt out, we won’t train our models on your new conversations. See our Data Controls FAQ for instructions for ChatGPT conversations and Codex tasks.
For a linked teen account, a parent or guardian may manage whether conversations can be used to improve our models through Parental controls .
Even if you have opted out of training, you can still choose to provide feedback to us about your interactions with our products (for instance, by selecting thumbs up or thumbs down on a model response). If you choose to provide feedback, the entire conversation associated with that feedback may be used to train our models.
Your support conversations may be used to improve OpenAI services, including our models, if training is enabled in Settings.
When you use ChatGPT, you can also use Temporary Chat by clicking the icon from the top right of the Chat screen. Chats from Temporary Chat won't appear in history, use or create memories, or be used to train our models.
Codex has separate controls for allowing training on full environments, which you can manage in the Codex Settings . Note that adjusting your settings in the ChatGPT interface or privacy portal will not affect these full-environment Codex settings.
Services for businesses, such as ChatGPT Business, ChatGPT Enterprise, and our API Platform
By default, we do not train on any inputs or outputs from our products for business users, including ChatGPT Business, ChatGPT Enterprise, and the API. We offer API customers a way to opt-in to share data with us, such as by providing feedback in the Playground , which we then use to improve our models. Unless they explicitly opt-in, organizations are opted out of data-sharing by default.
Please see our Enterprise Privacy page for information on how we handle business data.
What the process looks like
We retain certain data from your interactions with us, but we take steps to reduce the amount of personal information in our training datasets before they are used to improve and train our models. This data helps us better understand user needs and preferences, allowing our model to become more efficient over time. Your support conversations may be used to improve OpenAI services, including our models, if training is enabled in Settings.
For more on how we handle data, please see our Privacy Policy , Terms of Use , and Enterprise Privacy page .
Was this article helpful?
Submit
ChatGPT API Service Status Cookie Preferences
