Go to OpenAI English ; English
Go to OpenAI English ; English
Table of contents
All Collections
ChatGPT
Data Controls FAQ
Data Controls FAQ
Table of contents
What are the Data Controls settings?
Data controls offer you the ability to turn off chat history and easily choose whether your conversations will be used to train our models. They also give you the option to export your ChatGPT data and permanently delete your account.
How do I turn off chat history and model training?
Web interface:
To disable chat history and model training, navigate to ChatGPT > Data Controls. While history is disabled, new conversations won’t be used to train and improve our models, and won’t appear in the history sidebar. To monitor for abuse, we will retain all conversations for 30 days before permanently deleting.
Please note, this will not prevent unauthorized browser add-ons or malware on your computer from storing your history.
See How do I turn off chat history and model training? [Web]
iOS app:
To disable chat history and model training, tap the three dots on the top right corner of the screen > Settings > Data Controls > toggle off Chat History & Training. While history is disabled, new conversations won’t be used to train and improve our models, and won’t appear in the history sidebar. To monitor for abuse, we will retain all conversations for 30 days before permanently deleting.
See How do I turn off chat history and model training? [iOS app]
Android app:
You can access Chat History & Training controls by opening the menu through the three horizontal lines in the top left corner of your screen, selecting Settings , then clicking Data Controls . You should see Chat History & Training with a toggle.
See How do I turn off chat history and model training? [Android app]
Does this functionality sync between web and mobile devices?
This setting does not sync across browsers or devices. You will have to disable chat & history on each device/browser.
How do I export my data from ChatGPT?
To export your conversations, in ChatGPT, navigate to Settings > Data Controls. You’ll see an option to Export Data at the bottom-left corner of the pop-up. You’ll receive a file containing your ChatGPT data in an email.
For details see How do I export my ChatGPT history and data?
How do I delete my ChatGPT account?
To delete your account, navigate to Settings > Data Controls. At the bottom of the pop-up, you will see an option to delete your account. If you choose to delete your account, this is irreversible. If you are an API user via the same account, this data will also be deleted.
For details see How can I delete my account?
How does OpenAI use my personal data?
Our large language models are trained on a broad corpus of text that includes publicly available content, licensed content, and content generated by human reviewers. We don’t use data for selling our services, advertising, or building profiles of people—we use data to make our models more helpful for people. ChatGPT, for instance, improves by further training on the conversations people have with it, unless you choose to disable training.
If I disable history, does the setting apply to all my conversations, or can I choose specific conversations to enable it for?
While history is disabled, new chats will be deleted from our systems within 30 days – and reviewed only when needed to monitor for abuse – and won’t be used for model training. Existing conversations will still be saved and may be used for model training if you have not opted out.
If I disable history, what happens when the conversation closes?
When history is disabled, the conversation will not appear in your history (on the left-hand side of the screen) and cannot be recovered. When chat history is disabled, we will retain new conversations for 30 days and review them only when needed to monitor for abuse, before permanently deleting.
Are there any limitations or restrictions on disabling history and training?
There is no limit on the number of conversations you can have while history and training are disabled. This applies to both free and Plus subscriptions.
I previously opted out model training by writing to the support team. Will you continue to honor my opt-out?
Yes, we will continue to honor previous opt-out requests. The new Data Controls aim to make it easier to turn off chat history and easily choose whether your conversations will be used to train our models
What if I want to keep my history on but disable model training?
We don’t use content from our business offerings such as ChatGPT Team, ChatGPT Enterprise, and our API Platform to train our models. Please see our Enterprise Privacy page for information on how we handle business data.
If you are on a ChatGPT Plus or ChatGPT Free plan on a personal workspace, you can opt out of training through our privacy portal by clicking on “do not train on my content.” You can also turn off training for your ChatGPT conversations by switching Chat history & training off in Settings. Once you opt out, new conversations will not be used to train our models.
Do you have a ChatGPT business plan?
We currently have two subscription plans – ChatGPT Enterprise and ChatGPT Team . These plans are available for professionals who need more control of their data as well as enterprises seeking to manage their end users. Read more about our Enterprise privacy policies under the ChatGPT Team FAQ section and ChatGPT Enterprise FAQ section.
Related Articles
What is ChatGPT?
ChatGPT iOS app - FAQ
Disable chat history on iOS
ChatGPT Android app - FAQ
GPTs Data Privacy FAQs
Did this answer your question?
😞 😐 😃
• ChatGPT
• API
• DALL·E
• Service Status
•
•
