English ; English
English ; English
Table of contents
All Collections
ChatGPT
Data Controls
Data Controls FAQ
Data Controls FAQ
Table of contents
“ Chat history & model training” has been replaced with two separate features: Temporary Chats and Improve the model for everyone . We are rolling these new features out across web and mobile over the coming weeks.
What are the Data Controls settings?
Data controls offer you the ability to easily choose whether your conversations and memories will be used to improve and train our models, which makes ChatGPT better for you and everyone who uses it.
The specific controls that are offered to users may vary depending on their plan: for example, signed out users will have only the option to control training, whereas signed in users can also choose to export their data or delete their OpenAI account.
How do I turn off model training (ie. “Improve the model for everyone”)?
Web interface (as a logged in user):
To disable model training, navigate to your profile icon on the bottom-left of the page and select Settings > Data Controls, and disable “Improve the model for everyone." While this is disabled, new conversations won’t be used to train our models.
Web interface (as a logged out user):
​
To disable model training, navigate to the ? icon on the bottom-right of the page and select Settings > Data Controls and disable "Improve the model for everyone." While history is disabled, new conversations won’t be used to train and improve our models.
iOS app:
To disable model training, tap the three dots on the top right corner of the screen > Settings > Data Controls > toggle off “Improve the model for everyone.” While this is disabled, new conversations won’t be used to train our models.
Android app:
To disable model training, open the menu through the three horizontal lines in the top left corner of your screen, select Settings > Data Controls and toggle off “Improve the model for everyone.”
Does this functionality sync between web and mobile devices?
Yes, turning “improve the model for everyone” off means that new conversations will not be used to improve our models. This setting applies to your account and is not tied to a specific device.
How do I export my data from ChatGPT?
To export your conversations, in ChatGPT via web, navigate to Settings > Data Controls. You’ll see an option to Export Data at the bottom-left corner of the pop-up. You’ll receive a file containing your ChatGPT data in an email.
For details see How do I export my ChatGPT history and data?
How do I delete my ChatGPT account?
To delete your account, navigate to Settings > Data Controls. At the bottom of the pop-up, you will see an option to delete your account. If you choose to delete your account, this is irreversible. If you are an API user via the same account, this data will also be deleted.
For details see How can I delete my account?
How does OpenAI use my personal data?
Our large language models are trained on a broad corpus of text that includes publicly available content, licensed content, and content generated by human reviewers. We don’t use data for selling our services, advertising, or building profiles of people—we use data to make our models more helpful for people. ChatGPT, for instance, improves by further training on the conversations people have with it, unless you choose to disable training.
If I’m having a Temporary Chat, does the setting apply to all my conversations and memories, or can I choose specific conversations and memories to enable it for?
Temporary Chats are deleted from our systems within 30 days – and reviewed only when needed to monitor for abuse – and won’t be used for model training. Existing conversations will still be saved and may be used for model training if you have not opted out.
If I turn off “Improve the model for everyone,” what happens when the conversation closes?
When this setting is turned off, the conversation will still appear in your history (on the left-hand side of the screen) but will not be used for training. When having a Temporary Chat, we will retain new conversations for 30 days and review them only when needed to monitor for abuse, before permanently deleting.
Are there any limitations or restrictions on disabling history and training?
There are no limits or restrictions.
I previously opted out of model training by writing to the support team. Will you continue to honor my opt-out?
Yes, we will continue to honor training opt-out requests submitted to our support team or via privacy.openai.com or its predecessor.
At present, the “Improve the model for everyone” toggle within ChatGPT does not automatically reflect those opt outs requests - however, your data is not used for training purposes per your opt-out request. We are actively working to make sure that requests submitted outside of ChatGPT’s Data Control menu will automatically turn off the “improve the model for everyone” toggle.
Do you have a ChatGPT business plan?
Our subscription plans currently include ChatGPT Enterprise , ChatGPT Edu and ChatGPT Team . These plans are available for professionals who need more control of their data as well as enterprises seeking to manage their end users. Read more about our Enterprise privacy policies under the ChatGPT Team FAQ section and the ChatGPT Enterprise and ChatGPT Edu FAQ section.
Related Articles
How your data is used to improve model performance
What is ChatGPT?
GPTs Data Privacy FAQs
How do I turn off chat history and model training?
How is data retained in the macOS app?
Did this answer your question?
😞 😐 😃
• ChatGPT
• API
• DALL·E
• Service Status
•
•
