Go to OpenAI English ; English
Go to OpenAI English ; English
Table of contents
All Collections
Privacy and policies
Policy FAQ
How your data is used to improve model performance
How your data is used to improve model performance
Learn more about how OpenAI uses content from our services to improve and train our models.
Table of contents
One of the most useful and promising features of AI models is that they can improve over time. We continuously improve our models through research breakthroughs as well as exposure to real-world problems and data. When you share your content with us, it helps our models become more accurate and better at solving your specific problems and it also helps improve their general capabilities and safety. We don’t use your content to market our services or create advertising profiles of you—we use it to make our models more helpful. ChatGPT, for instance, improves by further training on the conversations people have with it, unless you opt out .
Services for individuals, such as ChatGPT and DALL•E
When you use our services for individuals such as ChatGPT or DALL•E, we may use your content to train our models.
You can opt out of training through our privacy portal by clicking on “do not train on my content,” or to turn off training for your ChatGPT conversations, follow the instructions in our Data Controls FAQ . Once you opt out, new conversations will not be used to train our models.
Services for businesses, such as ChatGPT Team, ChatGPT Enterprise, and our API Platform
We don’t use content from our business offerings such as ChatGPT Team, ChatGPT Enterprise, and our API Platform to train our models. Please see our Enterprise Privacy page for information on how we handle business data.
What the process looks like
We retain certain data from your interactions with us, but we take steps to reduce the amount of personal information in our training datasets before they are used to improve and train our models. This data helps us better understand user needs and preferences, allowing our model to become more efficient over time.
For more on how we handle data, please see our Privacy Policy , Terms of Use , and Enterprise Privacy page .
Related Articles
Data Controls FAQ
How ChatGPT and our language models are developed
GPTs Data Privacy FAQs
What if I want to keep my history on but disable model training?
How is data retained in the macOS app?
Did this answer your question?
😞 😐 😃
• ChatGPT
• API
• DALL·E
• Service Status
•
•
